Title: A Rose for Emily
Author: William Faulkner

When Miss Emily Grierson died, our whole town went to
her funeral: the men through a sort of respectful affection
for a fallen monument, the women mostly out of curiosity
to see the inside of her house, which no one save an old
man-servant—a combined gardener and cook—hadseen in
at least ten years.
It was a big, squarish frame housethat had once been white,
decorated with cupolas and spires and scrolled balconiesin the
heavily lightsome style of the seventies, set on what had once
been our mostselect street. But garages and cotton gins had encroached and obliterated even the august namesofthat neighborhood; only Miss Emilys house wasleft, lifting its stubborn
and coquettish decay above the cotton wagons andthegasoline
pumps—an eyesore amongeyesores. And now Miss Emily had
gone to join the representatives of those august names where
they lay in the cedar-bemused cemetery amongthe ranked and
anonymous graves of Union and Confederate soldiers who fell
at the battle of Jefferson.
Alive, Miss Emily had been a tradition, a duty, and a care;
a sort of hereditary obligation upon the town, dating from
that day in 1894 when Colonel Sartoris, the mayor—he who
fathered the edict that no Negro woman should appear on the
streets without an apron—remitted her taxes, the dispensation dating from the death of herfather on into perpetuity. Not
that Miss Emily would have accepted charity. Colonel Sartoris
invented an involvedtale to the effect that Miss Emily’s father
had loaned moneyto the town, which the town, as a matter of
business, preferred this way of repaying. Only a manof Colonel
Sartoris’ generation and thought could have invented it, and
only a woman could have believed it.
Whenthe next generation, with its more modern ideas, became mayors and aldermen, this arrangement created some
little dissatisfaction. On the first of the year they mailed her a
tax notice. February came, and there was no reply. They wrote
her a formalletter, asking her to call at the sheriff's office at her
convenience.
A week later the mayor wrote her himself, offering
to call or to send his car for her, and received in reply a note
on paper of an archaic shape, in a thin, flowing calligraphy in
faded ink, to the effect that she no longer went out at all. The
tax notice was also enclosed, without comment.
Theycalled a special meeting of the Board of Aldermen.
A deputation waited upon her, knockedat the door through which
no visitor had passed since she ceased giving china-painting
lessons eight or ten years earlier. They were admitted by the
old Negro into a dim hall from which a stairway mounted into
still more shadow.It smelled of dust and disuse—a close, dank
smell. The Negro led them into the parlor. It was furnished in
heavy, leather-covered furniture. When the Negro opened the
blinds of one window, a faint dust rose sluggishly abouttheir
thighs, spinning with slow motes in the single sun-ray. On a
tarnished gilt easel before the fireplace stood a crayon portrait
of Miss Emily’ father.
They rose when she entered—a small, fat woman in black,
with a thin gold chain descending to her waist and vanishing
into her belt, leaning on an ebony cane with a tarnished gold
head. Her skeleton was small and spare; perhaps that was why
what would have been merely plumpness in another was obesity in her. She looked bloated, like a body long submerged in
motionless water, and of that pallid hue. Her eyes, lost in the
fatty ridges of her face, looked like two small pieces of coal
pressed into a lump of dough as they moved from one face to
another while the visitors stated their errand.
She did not ask them to sit. She just stood in the door and
listened quietly until the spokesman cameto a stumblinghalt.
Then they could hear the invisible watch ticking at the end of
the gold chain.
Her voice was dry and cold. “I have no taxes in Jefferson.
Colonel Sartoris explained it to me. Perhaps oneof you can gain
access to the city records andsatisfy yourselves.”
“But we have. We are the city authorities, Miss Emily. Didn’t
you get a notice from the sheriff, signed by him?”
“I received a paper, yes,” Miss Emily said. “Perhaps he
considers himself the sheriff... 1 have no taxes in Jefferson.”
“But there is nothing on the booksto show that, you see. We
must go by the—”
“See Colonel Sartoris. 1 have no taxes in Jefferson.”
“But, Miss Emily—”
“See Colonel Sartoris.” (Colonel Sartoris had been dead
almost ten years.)
“I have no taxes in Jefferson. Tobe!” The Negro appeared.
“Show these gentlemen out.”
Il
So she vanquished them, horse and foot, just as she had vanquished their fathers thirty years before about the smell. That
was two years after her fathers death and a short time after
her sweetheart—the one we believed would marry her—had
deserted her. After her father’s death she went out verylittle;
after her sweetheart went away, people hardly saw herat all.
A few of the ladies had the temerity to call, but were not received, and the only sign of life about the place was the Negro
man—a young man then—going in and out with a market
basket.
“Just as if a man—any man—could keep a kitchen properly,”
the ladies said; so they were not surprised when the smell
developed. It was another link between the gross, teeming
world and the high and mighty Griersons.
A neighbor, a woman, complained to the mayor, Judge Stevens, eighty years old.
“But what will you have me do about it, madam?”hesaid.
“Why, send her wordto stop it,” the womansaid. “Isn't there
a law?”
“Pm sure that won't be necessary,” Judge Stevens said. “It’s
probably just a snake or a rat that nigger of hers killed in the
yard. I'll speak to him aboutit.”
The next day he received two more complaints, one from
a man who camein diffident deprecation. “We really must do
something aboutit, Judge. Pd be the last one in the world to
bother Miss Emily, but we've got to do something.” That night
the Board of Aldermen met—three graybeards and one younger
man, a memberofthe rising generation.
“Its simple enough,” he said. “Send her word to have her
place cleaned up. Give her a certain time to do it in, andif she
dont...”
“Dammit, sir,” Judge Stevens said, “will you accuse a lady to
her face of smelling bad?”
So the next night, after midnight, four men crossed Miss
Emily’s lawn and slunk about the house like burglars, sniffing
along the base of the brickwork and at the cellar openings while
one of them performed a regular sowing motion with his hand
out of a sack slung from his shoulder. They broke openthe cellar door and sprinkled limethere, andin all the outbuildings.
As they recrossed the lawn, a window that had been dark was
lighted and Miss Emily sat in it, the light behind her, and her
upright torso motionless as that of an idol. They crept quietly
across the lawn andinto the shadow of the locusts that lined the
street. After a week or two the smell went away.
That was when people had begunto feel really sorry for 
her. People in our town, remembering how old lady Wyatt, her
great-aunt, had gone completely crazy at last, believed that the
Griersons held themselvesa little too high for what they really
were. Noneof the young men were quite good enough for Miss
Emily and such. We had long thoughtof them as a tableau, Miss
Emily a slender figure in white in the background, her father
a spraddled silhouette in the foreground, his back to her and
clutching a horsewhip, the two of them framed by the backflung front door. So when she got to be thirty and wasstill
single, we were not pleased exactly, but vindicated; even with
insanity in the family she wouldn’t have turned downall of her
chances if they had really materialized.
Whenherfather died, it got about that the house wasall
that wasleft to her; and in a way, people wereglad. Atlast they
could pity Miss Emily. Beingleft alone, and a pauper, she had
become humanized. Now she too would know the old thrill
and the old despair of a penny moreorless.
The day after his death all the ladies prepared to call at the
house and offer condolence and aid, as is our custom. Miss
Emily met them at the door, dressed as usual and with no trace
of grief on her face. She told them thatherfather wasnot dead.
She did that for three days, with the ministers calling on her,
and the doctors, trying to persuadeherto let them dispose of
the body. Just as they were about to resort to law andforce, she
broke down, and they buried her father quickly.
We did not say she was crazy then. We believed she had to
do that. We remembered all the young menherfather had driven away, and we knew that with nothing left, she would have to
cling to that which had robbed her, as people will.
She was sick for a long time. When we saw her again, her
hair was cut short, making her look like a girl, with a vague
resemblance to those angels in colored church windows—sort
of tragic and serene.
The town hadjust let the contracts for paving the sidewalks,
and in the summerafter her father’s death they began the work.
The construction company came with riggers and mules and
machinery, and a foreman named Homer Barron, a Yankee—a
big, dark, ready man, with a big voice and eyeslighter than his
face. Thelittle boys would follow in groups to hear him cuss
the riggers, and the riggers singing in timeto therise and fall
of picks. Pretty soon he knew everybody in town. Whenever
you heard a lot of laughing anywhere about the square, Homer
Barron would be in the center of the group. Presently we began
to see him and Miss Emily on Sunday afternoonsdriving in the
yellow-wheeled buggy and the matched team of bays from the
livery stable.
At first we were glad that Miss Emily would have an interest, because the ladies all said, “Of course a Grierson would
not think seriously of a Northerner, a day laborer.” But there
werestill others, older people, who said that even grief could
not cause a real lady to forget noblesse oblige—withoutcalling it
noblesse oblige. They just said, “Poor Emily. Her kinsfolk should
cometo her.” She had some kin in Alabama; but years ago her
father had fallen out with them overtheestate of old lady Wyatt,
the crazy woman, and there was no communication between the
two families. They had not even been represented at the funeral.
And as soon as the old people said, “Poor Emily,” the whispering began. “Do you suppose its really so?” they said to one
another. “Of courseit is. What else could
. .” This behind their
hands; rustling of cranedsilk and satin behind jalousies closed
upon the sun of Sunday afternoonas the thin, swift clop-clopclop of the matched team passed: “Poor Emily.”
She carried her head high enough—even when webelieved
that she wasfallen. It was as if she demanded more than ever
the recognition of her dignity as the last Grierson: as if it had
wanted that touch of earthinessto reaffirm her imperviousness.
Like when she boughttherat poison, the arsenic. That was over
a year after they had begunto say “Poor Emily,” and while the
two female cousins werevisiting her.
“I want some poison,” she said to the druggist. She was over
thirty then, still a slight woman, though thinner than usual,
with cold, haughty black eyes in a face the flesh of which was
strained across the temples and about the eyesockets as you
imagine a lighthouse-keeper’s face oughtto look. “I want some
poison,” she said.
“Yes, Miss Emily. What kind? For rats and such? Pd recom—”
“I want the best you have. I don’t care what kind.”
The druggist namedseveral. “They'll kill anything up to an
elephant. But what you want is—”
“Arsenic,” Miss Emily said. “Is that a good one?”
“Is... arsenic? Yes, ma’am. But what you want—”
“IT want arsenic.”
The druggist looked down at her. She looked back at him,
erect, herface like a strained flag. “Why, of course,” the druggist
said. “If that’s what you want. Butthe law requires you to tell
what you are goingto useit for.”
Miss Emily just stared at him, her head tilted back in order to look him eye for eye, until he looked away and went
and got the arsenic and wrappedit up. The Negro delivery boy
brought her the package; the druggist didn’t come back. When
she opened the package at home there was written on the box,
under the skull and bones: “For rats.”
IV
So the next day weall said, “She will kill herself”; and we said
it would be the best thing. Whenshehad first begun to be seen
with HomerBarron, we hadsaid, “She will marry him.” Then we
said, “She will persuade him yet,” because Homer himself had
remarked—heliked men, and it was known that he drank with
the younger menin the Elks’ Club—that he was not a marrying
man. Later we said, “Poor Emily” behind the jalousies as they
passed on Sundayafternoonin the glittering buggy, Miss Emily
with her head high and HomerBarron with his hat cocked and
a cigar in his teeth, reins and whip in a yellow glove.
Then someof the ladies began to say that it was a disgrace
to the town and a bad example to the young people. The
men did not want to interfere, but at last the ladies forced the
Baptist minister—Miss Emilys people were Episcopal—to call
upon her. He would never divulge what happened during that
interview, but he refused to go back again. The next Sunday
they again drove about the streets, and the following day the
ministers wife wrote to Miss Emilyrelations in Alabama.
So she had blood-kin under her roof again and we sat back
to watch developments. At first nothing happened. Then we
were sure that they were to be married. We learned that Miss
Emily had been to the jeweler’s and ordered a man’toilet set
in silver, with the letters H. B. on each piece. Two dayslater we
learned that she had bought a completeoutfit of men’s clothing,
including a nightshirt, and we said, “They are married.” We
werereally glad. We were glad because the two female cousins
were even more Grierson than Miss Emily had ever been.
So we were not surprised when Homer Barron—thestreets
had been finished some time since—was gone. We were a
little disappointed that there was not a public blowing-off, but
we believed that he had gone on to prepare for Miss Emily's
coming, or to give her a chanceto get rid of the cousins. (By
that time it was a cabal, and we wereall Miss Emily’s allies to
help circumvent the cousins.) Sure enough, after another week
they departed. And, as we had expectedall along, within three
days HomerBarron was back in town.
A neighbor saw the Negro man admit him at the kitchen door at dusk one evening.
And that was the last we saw of HomerBarron. And of Miss
Emily for some time. The Negro man wentin and out with the
market basket, but the front door remained closed. Now and
then we would see her at a window for a moment, as the men
did that night when they sprinkled the lime, but for almost six
months she did not appear on the streets. Then we knew that
this was to be expected too; asif that quality of her father which
had thwarted her woman'slife so many times had beentoovirulent and too furiousto die.
When we next saw Miss Emily, she had grown fat and her
hair was turning gray. During the next few years it grew grayer
and grayer until it attained an even pepper-and-salt irongray, when it ceased turning. Up to the day of her death at
seventy-four it was still that vigorous iron-gray, like the hair of
an active man.
From that time on her front door remained closed, save for
a period of six or seven years, when she was about forty, during
which she gave lessons in china-painting. She fitted up a studio in one of the downstairs rooms, where the daughters and
grand-daughters of Colonel Sartoris’ contemporaries were sent
to her with the same regularity and in the samespirit that they
were sent to church on Sundays with a twenty-five cent piece
for the collection plate. Meanwhile her taxes had been remitted.
Then the newer generation became the backbone and the
spirit of the town, and the painting pupils grew up andfell away
and did not send their children to her with boxes of color and
tedious brushes and pictures cut from the ladies’ magazines.
The front door closed upon the last one and remained closed
for good. When the town got free postal delivery, Miss Emily
alone refused to let them fasten the metal numbers above her
door and attach a mailbox to it. She would not listen to them.
Daily, monthly, yearly we watched the Negro grow grayer and
more stooped, going in and out with the market basket. Each
December wesent her a tax notice, which would be returned by
the post office a week later, unclaimed. Now and then werwould
see her in one of the downstairs windows—she had evidently
shut up the top floor of the house—like the carven torso of an
idol in a niche, looking or not lookingat us, we could nevertell
which. Thus she passed from generation to generation—dear,
i le. impervious, tranquil, and perverse.
are ste died. Fell ill in the house filled with dust and
shadows, with only a doddering Negro man to wait on her. We
did not even know she was sick; we had long since given up
trying to get any information from the Negro. Hetalked to no
one, probably not even to her, for his voice had grown hars
and rusty,as if from disuse.
She died in one of the downstairs rooms, in a heavy walnut
bed with a curtain, her gray head propped on a pillow yellow
and moldy with age and lack of sunlight.
V
The negro met the first of the ladies at the front door and let
them in, with their hushed, sibilant voices and their quick, curious glances, and then he disappeared. He walked right through
the house and out the back and was not seen again.
The two female cousins cameat once. They held the funeral
on the second day, with the town coming to look at Miss Emily
beneath a mass of boughtflowers, with the crayon face of her
father musing profoundly abovethebier and the ladies sibilant
and macabre; and the very old men—somein their brushed
Confederate uniforms—on the porch and the lawn, talking of
Miss Emily as if she had been a contemporary of theirs, believing that they had danced with her and courted her perhaps,
confusing time with its mathematical progression, as the old
do, to whom all the pastis not a diminishing road but, instead,
a huge meadow which no winter ever quite touches, divided
from them now bythe narrow bottle-neck of the most recent
decade ofyears.
Already we knew that there was one room in that region
above stairs which no one had seenin forty years, and which
would have to be forced. They waited until Miss Emily was
decently in the ground before they openedit.
The violence of breaking down the door seemedto fill this
room with pervading dust.
A thin, acrid pall as of the tomb
seemedto lie everywhere upon this room decked and furnished
as for a bridal: upon the valance curtains of faded rose color,
upon the rose-shaded lights, upon the dressing table, upon the
delicate array of crystal and the man’toilet things backed with
tarnishedsilver, silver so tarnished that the monogram was obscured. Amongthemlay
a collar andtie, as if they had just been
removed, which, lifted, left upon the surface a pale crescent in
the dust. Upon a chair hungthesuit, carefully folded; beneath
it the two mute shoes and the discarded socks.
The man himself lay in the bed.
For a long while we just stood there, looking down at the
profound andfleshless grin. The body had apparently oncelain
in the attitude of an embrace, but now the long sleep that outlasts love, that conquers even the grimaceof love, had cuckolded him. What wasleft of him, rotted beneath what wasleft of
the nightshirt, had becomeinextricable from the bed in which
he lay; and upon him and uponthepillow beside him lay that
even coating of the patient and biding dust.
Then wenoticed that in the second pillow was the indentation of a head. One of uslifted something from it, and leaning
forward, that faint and invisible dust dry and acrid in the nostrils, we saw a long strand of iron-gray hair.