The train went on up the track out of sight, around one of the
hills of burnt timber. Nick sat down on the bundle of canvas and
bedding the baggage man had pitched out of the door of the baggage
car. There was no town, nothing but the rails and the burned-over
country. The thirteen saloons that had lined the one street of Seney
had not left a trace. The foundations of the Mansion House hotel
stuck up above the ground. The stone was chipped and split by the
fire. It was all that was left of the town of Seney. Even the surface had
been burned off the ground. 
Nick looked at the burned-out stretch of hillside, where he
had expected to find the scattered houses of the town and then
walked down the railroad track to the bridge over the river. The river
was there. It swirled against the log spiles of the bridge. Nick looked
down into the clear, brown water, colored from the pebbly bottom,
and watched the trout keeping themselves steady in the current with
wavering fins. As he watched them they changed their positions by
quick angles, only to hold steady in the fast water again. Nick
watched them a long time. 
He watched them holding themselves with their noses into
the current, many trout in deep, fast moving water, slightly distorted
as he watched far down through the glassy convex surface of the
pool, its surface pushing and swelling smooth against the resistance
of the log-driven piles of the bridge. At the bottom of the pool were
the big trout. Nick did not see them at first. Then he saw them at the
bottom of the pool, big trout looking to hold themselves on the gravel
bottom in a varying mist of gravel and sand, raised in spurts by the
current. 
Nick looked down into the pool from the bridge. It was a hot
day. A kingfisher flew up the stream. It was a long time since Nick
had looked into a stream and seen trout. They were very satisfactory.
As the shadow of the kingfisher moved up the stream, a big trout shot upstream in a long angle, only his shadow marking the angle,
then lost his shadow as he came through the surface of the water,
caught the sun, and then, as he went back into the stream under the
surface, his shadow seemed to float down the stream with the
current, unresisting, to his post under the bridge where he tightened
facing up into the current. 
Nick's heart tightened as the trout moved. He felt all the old
feeling.
He turned and looked down the stream. It stretched away,
pebbly-bottomed with shallows and big boulders and a deep pool as
it curved away around the foot of a bluff. 
Nick walked back up the ties to where his pack lay in the
cinders beside the railway track. He was happy. He adjusted the pack
harness around the bundle, pulling straps tight, slung the pack on his
back, got his arms through the shoulder straps and took some of the
pull off his shoulders by leaning his forehead against the wide band
of the tump-line. Still, it was too heavy. It was much too heavy. He
had his leather rod-case in his hand and leaning forward to keep the
weight of the pack high on his shoulders he walked along the road
that paralleled the railway track, leaving the burned town behind in
the heat, and then turned off around a hill with a high, fire-scarred
hill on either side onto a road that went back into the country. He
walked along the road feeling the ache from the pull of the heavy
pack. The road climbed steadily. It was hard work walking up-hill.
His muscles ached and the day was hot, but Nick felt happy. He felt
he had left everything behind, the need for thinking, the need to
write, other needs. It was all back of him.  
From the time he had gotten down off the train and the
baggage man had thrown his pack out of the open car door things
had been different. Seney was burned, the country was burned over
and changed, but it did not matter. It could not all be burned. He
knew that. He hiked along the road, sweating in the sun, climbing to
cross the range of hills that separated the railway from the pine
plains. 
The road ran on, dipping occasionally, but always climbing.
He went on up. Finally the road after going parallel to the burnt
hillside reached the top. Nick leaned back against a stump and
slipped out of the pack harness. Ahead of him, as far as he could see,
was the pine plain. The burned country stopped off at the left with
the range of hills. On ahead islands of dark pine trees rose out of the
plain. Far off to the left was the line of the river. Nick followed it with
his eye and caught glints of the water in the sun.     
There was nothing but the pine plain ahead of him, until the
far blue hills that marked the Lake Superior height of land. He could
hardly see them faint, and far away in the heat-light over the plain. If
he looked too steadily they were gone. But if he only half-looked they
were there, the far-off hills of the height of land. 
Nick sat down against the charred stump and smoked a
cigarette. His pack balanced on the top of the stump, harness holding
ready, a hollow molded in it from his back. Nick sat smoking, looking
out over the country. He did not need to get his map out. He knew
where he was from the position of the river. 
As he smoked, his legs stretched out in front of him, he
noticed a grasshopper walk along the ground and up onto his
woolen sock. The grasshopper was black. As he had walked along
the road, climbing, he had started many grasshoppers from with
dust. They were all black. They were not the big grasshoppers with
yellow and black or red and black wings whirring out from their
black wing sheathing as they fly up. These were just ordinary
hoppers, but all a sooty black in color. Nick had wondered about
them as he walked, without really thinking about them. Now, as he
watched the black hopper that was nibbling at the wool of his sock
with its fourway lip, he realized that they had all turned black from
living in the burned-over land. He realized that the fire must have
come the year before, but the grasshoppers were all black now. He
wondered how long they would stay that way. 
Carefully he reached his hand down and took hold of the
hopper by the wings. He turned him up, all his legs walking in the
air, and looked at his jointed belly. Yes, it was black too, iridescent
where the back and head were dusty. 
"Go on, hopper," Nick said, speaking out loud for the first
time. "Fly away somewhere." 
He tossed the grasshopper up into the air and watched him
sail away to a charcoal stump across the road. 
Nick stood up. He leaned his back against the weight of his
pack where it rested upright on the stump and got his arms through
the shoulder straps. He stood with the pack on his back on the brow
of the hill looking out across the country, toward the distant river and
then struck down the hillside away from the road. Underfoot the
ground was good walking. Two hundred yards down the fire line
stopped. Then it was sweet fern, growing ankle high, to walk
through, and clumps of jack pines; a long undulating country with
frequent rises and descents, sandy underfoot and the country alive
again. 
Nick kept his direction by the sun. He knew where he
wanted to strike the river and he kept on through the pine plain,
mounting small rises to see other rises ahead of him and sometimes
from the top of a rise a great solid island of pines off to his right or
his left. He broke off some sprigs of the heathery sweet fern, and put
them under his pack straps. The chafing crushed it and he smelled it
as he walked. 
He was tired and very hot, walking across the uneven,
shadeless pine plain. At any time he knew he could strike the river by
turning off to his left. It could not be more than a mile away. But he 
kept on toward the north to hit the river as far upstream as he could
go in one day's walking.
For some time as he walked Nick had been in sight of one of
the big islands of pine standing out above the rolling high ground he
was crossing. He dipped down and then as he came slowly up to the
crest of the bridge he turned and made toward the pine trees. There
was no underbrush in the island of pine trees. The trunks of the trees
went straight up or slanted toward each other. The trunks were
straight and brown without branches. The branches were high above.
Some interlocked to make a solid shadow on the brown forest floor.
Around the grove of trees was a bare space. It was brown and soft
underfoot as Nick walked on it. This was the over-lapping of the pine
needle floor, extending out beyond the width of the high branches.
The trees had grown tall and the branches moved high, leaving in the
sun this bare space they had once covered with shadow. Sharp at the
edge of this extension of the forest floor commenced the sweet
fern.      
Nick slipped off his pack and lay down in the shade. He lay
on his back and looked up into the pine trees. His neck and back and
the small of his back rested as he stretched. The earth felt good
against his back. He looked up at the sky, through the branches, and
then shut his eyes. He opened them and looked up again. There was
a wind high up in the branches. He shut his eyes again and went to
sleep.
Nick woke stiff and cramped. The sun was nearly down. His
pack was heavy and the straps painful as he lifted it on. He leaned
over with the pack on and picked up the leather rod-case and started
out from the pine trees across the sweet fern swale, toward the river.
He knew it could not be more than a mile.      
He came down a hillside covered with stumps into a
meadow. At the edge of  the meadow flowed the river. Nick was glad
to get to the river. He walked upstream through the meadow. His 
trousers were soaked with the dew as he walked. After the hot day,
the dew had come quickly and heavily. The river made no sound. It
was too fast and smooth. At the edge of the meadow, before he
mounted to a piece of high ground to make camp, Nick looked down
the river at the trout rising. They were rising to insects come from the
swamp on the other side of the stream when the sun went down. The
trout jumped out of water to take them. While Nick walked through
the little stretch of meadow alongside the stream, trout had jumped
high out of water. Now as he looked down the river, the insects must
be settling on the surface, for the trout were feeding steadily all down
the stream. As far down the long stretch as he could see, the trout
were rising, making circles all down the surface of the water, as
though it were starting to rain.      
The ground rose, wooded and sandy, to overlook the
meadow, the stretch of river and the swamp. Nick dropped his pack
and rod case and looked for a level piece of ground. He was very
hungry and he wanted to make his camp before he cooked. Between
two jack pines, the ground was quite level. He took the ax out of the
pack and chopped out two projecting roots. That leveled a piece of
ground large enough to sleep on. He smoothed out the sandy soil
with his hand and pulled all the sweet fern bushes by their roots. His
hands smelled good from the sweet fern. He smoothed the uprooted earth. He did not want anything making lumps under the
blankets. When he had the ground smooth, he spread his three
blankets. One he folded double, next to the ground. The other two he
spread on top.      
With the ax he slit off a bright slab of pine from one of the
stumps and split it into pegs for the tent. He wanted them long and
solid to hold in the ground. With the tent unpacked and spread on
the ground, the pack, leaning against a jackpine, looked much
smaller. Nick tied the rope that served the tent for a ridge-pole to the
trunk of one of the pine trees and pulled the tent up off the ground 
with the other end of the rope and tied it to the other pine. The
tent hung on the rope like a canvas blanket on a clothesline. Nick
poked a pole he had cut up under the back peak of the canvas and
then made it a tent by pegging out the sides. He pegged the sides out
taut and drove the pegs deep, hitting them down into the ground
with the flat of the ax until the rope loops were buried and the canvas
was drum tight.      
Across the open mouth of the tent Nick fixed cheesecloth to
keep out mosquitoes. He crawled inside under the mosquito bar with
various things from the pack to put at the head of the bed under the
slant of the canvas. Inside the tent the light came through the brown
canvas. It smelled pleasantly of canvas. Already there was something
mysterious and homelike. Nick was happy as he crawled inside the
tent. He had not been unhappy all day. This was different though.
Now things were done. There had been this to do. Now it was done.
It had been a hard trip. He was very tired. That was done. He had
made his camp. He was settled. Nothing could touch him. It was a
good place to camp. He was there, in the good place. He was in his
home where he had made it. Now he was hungry.      
He came out, crawling under the cheesecloth. It was quite
dark outside. It was lighter in the tent.      
Nick went over to the pack and found, with his fingers, a
long nail in a paper sack of nails, in the bottom of the pack. He drove
it into the pine tree, holding it close and hitting it gently with the flat
of the ax. He hung the pack up on the nail. All his supplies were in
the pack. They were off the ground and sheltered now.      
Nick was hungry. He did not believe he had ever been
hungrier. He opened and emptied a can at pork and beans and a can
of spaghetti into the frying pan.      
"I've got a right to eat this kind of stuff, if I'm willing to carry
it, Nick said. His voice sounded strange in the darkening woods. He
did not speak again. 
He started a fire with some chunks of pine he got with the ax
from a stump.    Over the fire he stuck a wire grill, pushing the four
legs down into the ground with his boot. Nick put the frying pan on
the grill over the flames. He was hungrier. The beans and spaghetti
warmed. Nick stirred them and mixed them together. They began to
bubble, making little bubbles that rose with difficulty to the surface.
There was a good smell. Nick got out a bottle of tomato catchup and
cut four slices of bread. The little bubbles were coming faster now.
Nick sat down beside the fire and lifted the frying pan off. He poured
about half the contents out into the tin plate. It spread slowly on the
plate. Nick knew it was too hot. He poured on some tomato catchup.
He knew the beans and spaghetti were still too hot. He looked at
the fire, then at the tent, he was not going to spoil it all by burning his
tongue. For years he had never enjoyed fried bananas because he had
never been able to wait for them to cool. His tongue was very
sensitive. He was very hungry. Across the river in the swamp, in the
almost dark, he saw a mist rising. He looked at the tent once more.
All right. He took a full spoonful from the plate.
"Chrise," Nick said, "Geezus Chrise," he said happily.      
He ate the whole plateful before he remembered the bread.
Nick finished the second plateful with the bread, mopping the plate
shiny. He had not eaten since a cup of coffee and a ham sandwich in
the station restaurant at St. Ignace. It had been a very fine experience.
He had been that hungry before, but had not been able to satisfy it.
He could have made camp hours before if he had wanted to. There
were plenty of good places to camp on the river. But this was
good.      
Nick tucked two big chips of pine under the grill. The fire
flared up. He had forgotten to get water for the coffee. Out of the
pack he got a folding canvas bucket and walked down the hill, across
the edge of the meadow, to the stream. The other bank was in the
white mist. The grass was wet and cold as he knelt on the bank and 
dipped the canvas bucket into the stream. It bellied and pulled hard
in the current. The water was ice cold. Nick rinsed the bucket and
carried it full up to the camp. Up away from the stream it was not
so cold.      
Nick drove another big nail and hung up the bucket full of
water. He dipped the coffee pot half full, put some more chips under
the grill onto the fire and put the pot on. He could not remember
which way he made coffee. He could remember an argument about it
with Hopkins, but not which side he had taken. He decided to bring
it to a boil. He remembered now that was Hopkins's way. He had
once argued about everything with Hopkins. While he waited for the
coffee to boil, he opened a small can of apricots. He liked to open
cans. He emptied the can of apricots out into a tin cup. While he
watched the coffee on the fire, he drank the juice syrup of the
apricots, carefully at first to keep from spilling, then meditatively,
sucking the apricots down. They were better than fresh apricots.      
The coffee boiled as he watched. The lid came up and coffee
and grounds ran down the side of the pot. Nick took it off the grill. It
was a triumph for Hopkins. He put sugar in the empty apricot cup
and poured some of the coffee out to cool. It was too hot to pour and
he used his hat to hold the handle of the coffee pot. He would not let
it steep in the pot at all. Not the first cup. It should be straight
Hopkins all the way. Hop deserved that. He was a very serious coffee
drinker. He was the most serious man Nick had ever known. Not
heavy, serious. That was a long time ago. Hopkins spoke without
moving his lips. He had played polo. He made millions of dollars in
Texas. He had borrowed carfare to go to Chicago, when the wire
came that his first big well had come in. He could have wired for
money. That would have been too slow. They called Hop's girl the
Blonde Venus. Hop did not mind because she was not his real girl.
Hopkins said very confidently that none of them would make fun of
his real girl. He was right. Hopkins went away when the telegram 
came. That was on the Black River. It took eight days for the telegram
to reach him. Hopkins gave away his .22 caliber Colt automatic pistol
to Nick. He gave his camera to Bill. It was to remember him always
by. They were all going fishing again next summer. The Hop Head
was rich. He would get a yacht and they would all cruise along the
north shore of Lake Superior. He was excited but serious. They said
good-bye and all felt bad. It broke up the trip. They never saw
Hopkins again. That was a long time ago on the Black River.      
Nick drank the coffee, the coffee according to Hopkins. The
coffee was bitter. Nick laughed. It made a good ending to the story.
His mind was starting to work. He knew he could choke it because
he was tired enough. He spilled the coffee out of the pot and shook
the grounds loose into the fire. He lit a cigarette and went inside the
tent. He took off his shoes and trousers, sitting on the blankets, rolled
the shoes up inside the trousers for a pillow and got in between the
blankets.      
Out through the front of the tent he watched the glow of the
fire when the night wind blew on it. It was a quiet night. The swamp
was perfectly quiet. Nick stretched under the blanket comfortably. A
mosquito hummed close to his ear. Nick sat up and lit a match. The
mosquito was on the canvas, over his head. Nick moved the match
quickly up to it. The mosquito made a satisfactory hiss in the flame.
The match went out. Nick lay down again under the blanket. He
turned on his side and shut his eyes. He was sleepy. He felt sleep
coming. He curled up under the blanket and went to sleep.
In the morning the sun was up and the tent was starting to
get hot. Nick crawled out under the mosquito netting stretched
across the mouth of the tent, to look at the morning. The grass was
wet on his hands as he came out. He held his trousers and his shoes
in his hand. The sun was just up over the hill. There was the
meadow, the river and the swamp. There were birch trees in the
green of the swamp on the other side of the river.      
The river was clear and smoothly fast in the early morning.
Down about two hundred yards were three logs all the way across
the stream. They made the water smooth and deep above them. As
Nick watched, a mink crossed the river on the logs and went into the
swamp. Nick was excited. He was excited by the early morning and
the river. He was really too hurried to eat breakfast, but he knew he
must. He built a little fire and put on the coffee pot.      
While the water was heating in the pot he took an empty
bottle and went down over the edge of the high ground to the
meadow. The meadow was wet with dew and Nick wanted to catch
grasshoppers for bait before the sun dried the grass. He found plenty
of good grasshoppers. They were at the base of the grass stems.
Sometimes they clung to a grass stem. They were cold and wet with
the dew, and could not jump until the sun warmed them. Nick
picked them up, taking only the medium-sized brown ones, and put
them into the bottle. He turned over a log and just under the shelter
of the edge were several hundred hoppers. It was a grasshopper
lodging house. Nick put about fifty of the medium browns into the
bottle. While he was picking up the hoppers the others warmed in
the sun and commenced to hop away. They flew when they hopped.
At first they made one flight and stayed stiff when they landed, as
though they were dead.      
Nick knew that by the time he was through with breakfast
they would be as lively as ever. Without dew in the grass it would 
take him all day to catch a bottle full of good grasshoppers and he
would have to crush many of them, slamming at them with his hat.
He washed his hands at the stream. He was excited to be near it.
Then he walked up to the tent. The hoppers were already jumping
stiffly in the grass. In the bottle, warmed by the sun, they were
jumping in a mass. Nick put in a pine stick as a cork. It plugged
the mouth of the bottle enough, so the hoppers could not get out and
left plenty of air passage.      
He had rolled the log back and knew he could get
grasshoppers there every morning.      
Nick laid the bottle full of jumping grasshoppers against a
pine trunk. Rapidly he mixed some buckwheat flour with water and
stirred it smooth, one cup of flour, one cup of water. He put a handful
of coffee in the pot and dipped a lump of grease out of a can and slid
it sputtering across the hot skillet. On the smoking skillet he poured
smoothly the buckwheat batter. It spread like lava, the grease spitting
sharply. Around the edges the buckwheat cake began to firm, then
brown, then crisp. The surface was bubbling slowly to
porousness. Nick pushed under the browned under surface with a
fresh pine chip. He shook the skillet sideways and the cake was loose
on the surface. I won't try and flop it, he thought. He slid the chip of
clean wood all the way under the cake, and flopped it over onto its
face. It sputtered in the pan.      
When it was cooked Nick regreased the skillet. He used all
the batter. It made another big flapjack and one smaller one.      
Nick ate a big flapjack and a smaller one, covered with apple
butter. He put apple butter on the third cake, folded it over twice,
wrapped it in oiled paper and put it in his shirt pocket. He put the
apple butter jar back in the pack and cut bread for two
sandwiches.      
In the pack he found a big onion. He sliced it in two and
peeled the silky outer skin. Then he cut one half into slices and made 
onion sandwiches. He wrapped them in oiled paper and buttoned
them in the other pocket of his khaki shirt. He turned the skillet
upside down on the grill, drank the coffee, sweetened and yellow
brown with the condensed milk in it, and tidied up the camp. It was
a good camp.      
Nick took his fly rod out of the leather rod-case, jointed it,
and shoved the rod-case back into the tent. He put on the reel and
threaded the line through the guides. He had to hold it from hand to
hand, as he threaded it, or it would slip back through its own weight.
It was a heavy, double tapered fly line. Nick had paid eight dollars
for it a long time ago. It was made heavy to lift back in the air and
come forward flat and heavy and straight to make it possible to cast a
fly which has no weight. Nick opened the aluminum leader box. The
leaders were coiled between the damp flannel pads. Nick had wet the
pads at the water cooler on the train up to St. Ignace. In the damp
pads the gut leaders had softened and Nick unrolled one and tied it
by a loop at the end to the heavy fly line. He fastened a hook on the
end of the leader. It was a small hook; very thin and springy.       
Nick took it from his hook book, sitting with the rod across
his lap. He tested the knot and the spring of the rod by pulling the
line taut. It was a good feeling. He was careful not to let the hook bite
into his finger.      
He started down to the stream, holding his rod, the bottle of
grasshoppers hung from his neck by a thong tied in half hitches
around the neck of the bottle. His landing net hung by a hook from
his belt. Over his shoulder was a long flour sack tied at each corner
into an ear. The cord went over his shoulder. The sack slapped
against his legs.      
Nick felt awkward and professionally happy with all his
equipment hanging: from him. The grasshopper bottle swung against
his chest. In his shirt the breast pockets bulged against him with the
lunch and his fly book. 
He stepped into the stream. It was a shock. His trousers
clung tight to his legs. His shoes felt the gravel. The water was a
rising cold shock.      
Rushing, the current sucked against his legs. Where he
stepped in, the water was over his knees. He waded with the current.
The gravel slid under his shoes. He looked down at the swirl of water
below each leg and tipped up the bottle to get a grasshopper.
The first grasshopper gave a jump in the neck of the bottle
and went out into the water. He was sucked under in the whirl by
Nick's right leg and came to the surface a little way down stream. He
floated rapidly, kicking. In a quick circle, breaking the smooth surface
of the water, he disappeared. A trout had taken him.      
Another hopper poked his face out of the bottle. His
antennas wavered. He was getting his front legs out of the bottle to
jump. Nick took him by the head and held him while he threaded the
slim hook under his chin, down through his thorax and into the last
segments of his abdomen. The grasshopper took hold of the hook
with his front feet, spitting tobacco juice on it. Nick dropped him into
the water.      
Holding the rod in his right hand he let out line against the
pull of the grasshopper in the current. He stripped off line from the
reel with his left hand and let it run free. He could see the hopper in
the little waves of the current. It went out of sight.      
There was a tug on the line. Nick pulled against the taut line.
It was his first strike. Holding the now living rod across the current,
he brought in the line with his left hand. The rod bent in jerks, the
trout pumping against the current. Nick knew it was a small one. He
lifted the rod straight up in the air. It bowed with the pull.      
He saw the trout in the water jerking with his head and body
against the   shifting tangent of the line in the stream.     
Nick took the line in his left hand and pulled the trout,
thumping tiredly against the current, to the surface. His back was
mottled the clear, water-over-gravel color, his side flashing in the sun.
The rod under his right arm, Nick stooped, dipping his right hand
into the current. He held the trout, never still, with his moist right
hand, while he unhooked the barb from his mouth, then dropped
him back into the stream.      
He hung unsteadily in the current, then settled to the bottom
beside a stone. Nick reached down his hand to touch him, his arm to
the elbow under water. The trout was steady in the moving stream
resting on the gravel, beside a stone. As Nick's fingers touched him,
touched his smooth, cool, underwater feeling, he was gone, gone in a
shadow across the bottom of the stream.      
He's all right, Nick thought. He was only tired.      
He had wet his hand before he touched the trout, so he
would not disturb the delicate mucus that covered him. If a trout
was touched with a dry hand, a white fungus attacked the
unprotected spot. Years before when he had fished crowded streams,
with fly fishermen ahead of him and behind him, Nick had again and
again come on dead trout furry with white fungus, drifted against a
rock, or floating belly up in some pool. Nick did not like to fish with
other men on the river. Unless they were of your party, they spoiled
it.      
He wallowed down the steam, above his knees in the
current, through the fifty yards of shallow water above the pile of
logs that crossed the stream. He did not rebait his hook and held it in
his hand as he waded. He was certain he could catch small trout in
the shallows, but he did not want them. There would be no big trout
in the shallows this time of day.      
Now the water deepened up his thighs sharply and coldly.
Ahead was the smooth dammed-back flood of water above the logs. 
The water was smooth and dark; on the left, the lower edge of the
meadow; on the right the swamp.
Nick leaned back against the current and took a hopper from
the bottle. He threaded the hopper on the hook and spat on him for
good luck. Then he pulled several yards of line from the reel and
tossed the hopper out ahead onto the fast, dark water. It floated
down towards the logs, then the weight of the line pulled the bait
under the surface Nick held the rod in his right hand, letting the line
run out through his fingers.      
There was a long tug. Nick struck and the rod came alive and
dangerous, bent double, the line tightening, coming out of water,
tightening, all in a heavy, dangerous, steady pull. Nick felt the
moment when the leader would break if the strain increased and let
the line go.      
The reel ratcheted into a mechanical shriek as the line went
out in a rush. Too fast. Nick could not check it, the line rushing out,
the reel note rising as the line ran out.
With the core of the reel showing, his heart feeling stopped
with the excitement, leaning back against the current that mounted
icily his thighs, Nick thumbed the reel hard with his left hand. It was
awkward getting his thumb inside the fly reel frame.      
As he put on pressure the line tightened into sudden
hardness and beyond the logs a huge trout went high out of water.
As he jumped, Nick lowered the tip of the rod. But he felt, as he
dropped the tip to ease the strain, the moment when the strain was
too great; the hardness too tight. Of course, the leader had broken.
There was no mistaking the feeling when all spring left the line and it
became dry and hard. Then it went slack. 
His mouth dry, his heart down, Nick reeled in. He had never
seen so big a trout. There was a heaviness, a power not to be held,
and then the bulk of him, as he jumped. He looked as broad as a
salmon. 
Nick's hand was shaky. He reeled in slowly. The thrill had
been too much. He felt, vaguely, a little sick, as though it would be
better to sit down.  
The leader had broken where the hook was tied to it. Nick
took it in his hand. He thought of the trout somewhere on the
bottom, holding himself steady over the gravel, far down below the
light, under the logs, with the hook in his jaw. Nick knew the trout's
teeth would cut through the snell of the hook. The hook would
imbed itself in his jaw. He'd bet the trout was angry. Anything that
size would be angry. That was a trout. He had been solidly hooked.
Solid as a rock. He felt like a rock, too, before he started off. By God,
he was a big one. By God, he was the biggest one I ever heard of.      
Nick climbed out onto the meadow and stood, water running
down his trousers and out of his shoes, his shoes squelchy. He went
over and sat on the logs. He did not want to rush his sensations any.
He wriggled his toes in the water, in his shoes, and got out a
cigarette from his breast pocket. He lit it and tossed the match into
the fast water below the logs. A tiny trout rose at the match, as it
swung around in the fast current. Nick laughed. He would finish the
cigarette.      
He sat on the logs, smoking, drying in the sun, the sun warm
on his back, the river shallow ahead entering the woods, curving into
the woods, shallows, light glittering, big watersmooth rocks, cedars
along the bank and white birches, the logs warm in the sun, smooth
to sit on, without bark, gray to the touch; slowly the feeling of
disappointment left him. It went away slowly, the feeling of
disappointment that came sharply after the thrill that made
his shoulders ache. It was all right now. His rod lying out on the logs.
Nick tied a new hook on the leader, pulling the gut tight until it
grimped into itself in a hard knot. 
He baited up, then picked up the rod and walked to the far
end of the logs to get into the water, where it was not too deep.
Under and beyond the logs was a deep pool. Nick walked around the
shallow shelf near the swamp shore until he came out on the shallow
bed of the stream.      
On the left, where the meadow ended and the woods began,
a great elm tree was uprooted. Gone over in a storm, it lay back into
the woods, its roots clotted with dirt, grass growing in them, rising a
solid bank beside the stream. The river cut to the edge of the
uprooted tree. From where Nick stood he could see deep channels,
like ruts, cut in the shallow bed of the stream by the flow of the
current. Pebbly where he stood and pebbly and full of
boulders beyond; where it curved near the tree roots, the bed of the
stream was marly and between the ruts of deep water green weed
fronds swung in the current.      
Nick swung the rod back over his shoulder and forward, and
the line, curving forward, laid the grasshopper down on one of the
deep channels in the weeds. A trout struck and Nick hooked him      
Holding the rod far out toward the uprooted tree and
sloshing backward in the current, Nick worked the trout, plunging,
the rod bending alive, out of the danger of the weeds into the open
river. Holding the rod, pumping alive against the current, Nick
brought the trout in. He rushed, but always came, the spring of the
rod yielding to the rushes, sometimes jerking under water, but
always bringing him in. Nick eased downstream with the rushes. The
rod above his head he led the trout over the net, then lifted.      
The trout hung heavy in the net, mottled trout back and
silver sides in the meshes. Nick unhooked him; heavy sides, good to
hold, big undershot jaw and slipped him, heaving and big sliding,
into the long sack that hung from his shoulders in the water.      
Nick spread the mouth of the sack against the current and it
filled, heavy with water. He held it up, the bottom in the stream, and 
the water poured out through the sides. Inside at the bottom was the
big trout, alive in the water.      
Nick moved downstream. The sack out ahead of him sunk
heavy in the water, pulling from his shoulders.      
It was getting hot, the sun hot on the back of his neck.      
Nick had one good trout. He did not care about getting many
trout. Now the stream was shallow and wide. There were trees along
both banks. The trees of the left bank made short shadows on the
current in the forenoon sun. Nick knew there were trout in
each shadow. In the afternoon, after the sun had crossed toward the
hills, the trout would be in the cool shadows on the other side of the
stream.      
The very biggest ones would lie up close to the bank. You
could always pick them up there on the Black. When the sun was
down they all moved out into the current. Just when the sun made
the water blinding in the glare before it went down, you were liable
to strike a big trout anywhere in the current. It was almost impossible
to fish then, the surface of the water was blinding as a mirror in the
sun. Of course, you could fish upstream, but in a stream like
the Black, or this, you had to wallow against the current and in a
deep place, the water piled up on you. It was no fun to fish upstream
with this much current.      
Nick moved along through the shallow stretch watching the
banks for deep holes. A beech tree grew close beside the river, so that
the branches hung down into the water. The stream went back in
under the leaves. There were always trout in a place like that.      
Nick did not care about fishing that hole. He was sure he
would get hooked in the branches.      
It looked deep though. He dropped the grasshopper so the
current took it under water, back in under the overhanging branch.
The line pulled hard and Nick struck. The trout threshed heavily
half out of water in the leaves and branches. The line was caught.
Nick pulled hard and the trout was off. He reeled in and holding the
hook in his hand walked down the stream.      
Ahead, close to the left bank, was a big log. Nick saw it was
hollow, pointing up river the current entered it smoothly, only a little
ripple spread each side of the log. The water was deepening. The top
of the hollow log was gray and dry. It was partly in shadow.      
Nick took the cork out of the grasshopper bottle and a
hopper clung to it. He picked him off, hooked him and tossed him
out. He held the rod far out so that the hopper on the water moved
into the current flowing into the hollow log. Nick lowered the rod
and the hopper floated in. There was a heavy strike. Nick swung the
rod against the pull. It felt as though he were hooked into the log
itself, except for the live feeling. He tried to force the fish out into the
current. It came, heavily.      
The line went slack and Nick thought the trout was gone.
Then he saw him, very near, in the current, shaking his head, trying
to get the hook out. His mouth was clamped shut. He was fighting
the hook in the clear flowing current.
Looping in the line with his left hand, Nick swung the rod to
make the line taut and tried to lead the trout toward the net, but he
was gone, out of sight, the line pumping. Nick fought him against the
current, letting him thump in the water against the spring of the rod.
He shifted the rod to his left hand, worked the trout upstream,
holding his weight, fighting on the rod, and then let him down into
the net. He lifted him clear of the water, a heavy half circle in the net,
the net dripping, unhooked him and slid him into the sack.      
He spread the mouth of the sack and looked down in at the
two big trout alive in the water.      
Through the deepening water, Nick waded over to the
hollow log. He took the sack off, over his head, the trout flopping as
it came out of water, and hung it so the trout were deep in the water.
Then he pulled himself up on the log and sat, the water from his
trouser and boots running down into the stream. He laid his rod
down, moved along to the shady end of the log and took the
sandwiches out of his pocket. He dipped the sandwiches in the cold
water. The current carried away the crumbs. He ate the sandwiches
and dipped his hat full of water to drink, the water running out
through his hat just ahead of his drinking.      
It was cool in the shade, sitting on the log. He took a cigarette
out and struck a match to light it. The match sunk into the gray
wood, making a tiny furrow. Nick leaned over the side of the log,
found a hard place and lit the match. He sat smoking and watching
the river.      
Ahead the river narrowed and went into a swamp. The river
became smooth and deep and the swamp looked solid with cedar
trees, their trunks close together, their branches solid. It would not
be possible to walk through a swamp like that. The branches grew so
low. You would have to keep almost level with the ground to move at
all. You could not crash through the branches. That must be why the
animals that lived in swamps were built the way they were, Nick
thought.      
He wished he had brought something to read. He felt like
reading. He did not feel like going on into the swamp. He looked
down the river. A big cedar slanted all the way across the stream.
Beyond that the river went into the swamp.      
Nick did not want to go in there now. He felt a reaction
against deep wading with the water deepening up under his armpits,
to hook big trout in places impossible to land them. In the swamp the
banks were bare, the big cedars came together overhead, the sun did
not come through, except in patches; in the fast deep water, in the
half light, the fishing would be tragic. In the swamp fishing was a
tragic adventure. Nick did not want it. He didn't want to go down
the stream any further today.      
He took out his knife, opened it and stuck it in the log. Then
he pulled up the sack, reached into it and brought out one of the
trout. Holding him near the tail, hard to hold, alive, in his hand, he
whacked him against the log. The trout quivered, rigid. Nick laid him
on the log in the shade and broke the neck of the other fish the same
way. He laid them side by side on the log. They were fine trout.      
Nick cleaned them, slitting them from the vent to the tip of
the jaw. All the insides and the gills and tongue came out in one
piece. They were both males; long gray-white strips of milt, smooth
and clean. All the insides clean and compact, coming out all together.
Nick took the offal ashore for the minks to find.
He washed the trout in the stream. When he held them back
up in the water, they looked like live fish. Their color was not gone
yet. He washed his hands and dried them on the log. Then he laid
the trout on the sack spread out on the log, rolled them up in it, tied
the bundle and put it in the landing net. His knife was still standing,
blade stuck in the log. He cleaned it on the wood and put it in his
pocket. 
Nick stood up on the log, holding his rod, the landing net
hanging heavy, then stepped into the water and splashed ashore. He
climbed the bank and cut up into the woods, toward the high
ground. He was going back to camp. He looked back. The river just
showed through the trees. There were plenty of days coming when
he could fish the swamp.