Title: Game
Author: Donald Barthelme

Shotwell keeps the jacks and the rubber ball in his attaché case and will not allow me to play with them. He
plays with them, alone, sitting on the floor near the console hour after hour, chanting "onesies, twosies, threesies,
foursies" in a precise, well-modulated voice, not so loud as to be annoying, not so soft as to allow me to forget. I
point out to Shotwell that two can derive more enjoyment from playing jacks than one, but he is not interested. I
have asked repeatedly to be allowed to play by myself, but he simply shakes his head. "Why?" I ask. "They're
mine," he says. And when he has finished, when he has sated himself, back they go into the attaché case.
It is unfair but there is nothing I can do about it. I am aching to get my hands on them.
Shotwell and I watch the console. Shotwell and I live under the ground and watch the console. If certain events
take place upon the console, we are to insert our keys in the appropriate locks and turn our keys. Shotwell has a
key and I have a key. If we turn our keys simultaneously the bird flies, certain switches are activated and the bird
flies. But the bird never flies. In one hundred thirty-three days the bird has not flown. Meanwhile Shotwell and I
watch each other. We each wear a .45 and if Shotwell behaves strangely I am supposed to shoot him. If I behave
strangely Shotwell is supposed to shoot me. We watch the console and think about shooting each other and think
about the bird. Shotwell's behavior with the jacks is strange. Is it strange? I do not know. Perhaps he is merely a
selfish bastard, perhaps his character is flawed, perhaps his childhood was twisted. I do not know.
Each of us wears a .45 and each of us is supposed to shoot the other if the other is behaving strangely. How
strangely is strangely? I do not know. In addition to the .45 I have a .38 which Shotwell does not know about
concealed in my attaché case, and Shotwell has a .25 caliber Beretta which I do not know about strapped to his
right calf. Sometimes instead of watching the console I pointedly watch Shotwell's .45, but this is simply a ruse,
simply a maneuver, in reality I am watching his hand when it dangles in the vicinity of his right calf. If he
decides I am behaving strangely he will shoot me not with the .45 but with the Beretta. Similarly Shotwell
pretends to watch my .45 but he is really watching my hand resting idly atop my attaché case, my hand resting
atop my attaché case, my hand. My hand resting idly atop my attaché case.
In the beginning I took care to behave normally. So did Shotwell. Our behavior was painfully normal. Norms of
politeness, consideration, speech and personal habits were scrupulously observed. But then it became apparent
that an error had been made, that our relief was not going to arrive. Owing to an oversight. Owing to an
oversight we have been here for one hundred thirty-three days. When it became clear that an error had been
made, that we were not to be relieved, the norms were relaxed. Definitions of normality were redrawn in the
agreement of January 1, called by us, The Agreement. Uniform regulations were relaxed, and mealtimes are no
longer rigorously scheduled. We eat when we are hungry and sleep when we are tired. Considerations of rank
and precedence were temporarily put aside, a handsome concession on the part of Shotwell, who is a captain,
whereas I am only a first lieutenant. One of us watches the console at all times rather than two of us watching the
console at all times, except when we are both on our feet. One of us watches the console at all times and if the
bird flies then that one wakes the other and we turn our keys in the locks simultaneously and the bird flies. Our
system involves a delay of perhaps twelve seconds but I do not care because I am not well, and Shotwell does
not care because he is not himself. After the agreement was signed Shotwell produced the jacks and the rubber
ball from his attaché case, and I began to write a series of descriptions of forms occurring in nature, such as a
shell, a leaf, a stone, an animal. On the walls.
Shotwell plays jacks and I write descriptions of natural forms on the walls. Shotwell is enrolled in a USAFI
course which leads to a master's degree in business administration from the University of Wisconsin (although
we are not in Wisconsin, we are in Utah, Montana or Idaho). When we went down it was in either Utah, Montana
or Idaho, I don't remember. We have been here for one hundred thirty-three days owing to an oversight. The pale
green reinforced concrete walls sweat and the air conditioning zips on and off erratically and Shotwell reads
Introduction to Marketing by Lassiter and Munk, making notes with a blue ballpoint pen. Shotwell is not himself
but I do not know it, he presents a calm aspect and reads Introduction to Marketing and makes his exemplary
notes with a blue ballpoint pen, meanwhile controlling the .38 in my attaché case with one-third of his attention.
I am not well.
We have been here one hundred thirty-three days owing to an oversight. Although now we are not sure what is
oversight, what is plan. Perhaps the plan is for us to stay here permanently, or if not permanently at least for a
year, for three hundred sixty-five days. Or if not for a year for some number of days known to them and not
known to us, such as two hundred days. It may be that they are pleased with us, with our behavior, not in every
detail but in sum. Perhaps the whole thing is very successful, perhaps the whole thing is a experiment and the
experiment is very successful. I do not know. But I suspect that the only way they can persuade sun-loving
creatures into their pale green sweating reinforced concrete rooms under the ground is to say that the system is
twelve hours on, twelve hours off. And then lock us below for some number of days known to them and not
known to us. We eat well although the frozen enchiladas are damp when defrosted and the frozen devil's food
cake is sour and untasty. We sleep uneasily and acrimoniously. I hear Shotwell shouting in his sleep, objecting,
denouncing, cursing sometimes, weeping sometimes, in his sleep. When Shotwell sleeps I try to pick the lock on
his attaché case, so as to get at the jacks. Thus far I have been unsuccessful. Nor has Shotwell been successful in
picking the locks on my attaché case so as to get at the .38. I have seen the marks on the shiny surface. I laughed,
in the latrine, pale green walls sweating and the air conditioning whispering, in the latrine. I write descriptions of

natural forms on the walls, scratching them on the tile surface with a diamond. The diamond is a two and one-
half carat solitaire I had in my attaché case when we went down. It was for Lucy. The south wall of the room

containing the console is already covered. I have described a shell, a leaf, a stone, animals, a baseball bat. I am
aware that the baseball bat is not a natural form. Yet I described it. "The baseball bat," I said, "is typically made
of wood. It is typically one meter in length or a little longer, fat at on end, tapering to afford a comfortable grip at
the other end. The end with the handhold typically offers a slight rim, or lip, at the nether extremity, to prevent
slippage." My description of the baseball bat ran to 4500 words, all scratched with a diamond on the south wall.
Does Shotwell read what I have written? I do not know. I am aware that Shotwell regards my writing-behaviour
as strange. Yet it is no stranger than his jacks-behaviour, or the day he appeared in black bathing trunks with the
.25 caliber Beretta strapped to his right calf and stood over the console, trying to span with his two arms
outstretched the distance between the two locks. He could not do it, I had already tried, standing over the console
with my two arms outstretched, the distance is too great. I was moved to comment but did not comment,
comment would have provoked counter-comment, comment would have led God knows where. They had in their
infinite patience, in their infinite foresight, in their infinite wisdom already imagined a man standing over the
console with his two arms outstretched, trying to span with his two arms outstretched the distance between the
locks.
Shotwell is not himself. He has made certain overtures. The burden of his message is not clear. It has something
to do with the keys, with the locks. Shotwell is a strange person. He appears to be less affected by our situation
than I. He goes about his business stolidly, watching the console, studying Introduction to Marketing, bouncing
his rubber ball on the floor in a steady, rhythmical, conscientious manner. He appears to be less affected by our
situation than I am. He is stolid. He says nothing. But he has made certain overtures, certain overtures have been
made. I am not sure that I understand them. They have something to do with the keys, with the locks. Shotwell
has something in mind. Stolidly he shucks the shiny silver paper from the frozen enchiladas, stolidly he stuffs
them into the electric oven. But he has something in mind. But there must be a quid pro quo. I insist on a quid
pro quo. I have something in mind.
I am not well. I do not know our target. They do not tell us for which city the bird is targeted. I do not know. That
is planning. That is not my responsibility. My responsibility is to watch the console and when certain events take
place upon the console, turn my key in the lock. Shotwell bounces the rubber ball on the floor in a steady, stolid,

rhythmical manner. I am aching to get my hands on the ball, on the jacks. We have been here one hundred thirty-
three days owing to an oversight. I write on the walls. Shotwell chants "onesies, twosies, threesies, foursies" in a

precise, well-modulated voice. Now he cups the jacks and the rubber ball in his hands and rattles them
suggestively. I do not know for which city the bird is targeted. Shotwell is not himself.
Sometimes I cannot sleep. Sometimes Shotwell cannot sleep. Sometimes when Shotwell cradles me in his arms
and rocks me to sleep, singing Brahms' "Guten abend, gut Nacht," or I cradle Shotwell in my arms and rock him
to sleep, singing, I understand what it is Shotwell wishes me to do. At such moments we are very close. But only
if he will give me the jacks. That is fair. There is something he wants me to do with my key, while he does
something with his key. But only if he will give me my turn. That is fair. I am not well.