Title: Princess Mary 
Author: Mikhail Lermontov

May 11
Yesterday I arrived in Pyatigorsk and rented
quarters in the outskirts at the foot of Mashuk; this
is the highest part of the town, so high that the
clouds will reach down to my roof during
thunderstorms. When I opened the window at five o'clock this
morning the fragrance of the flowers growing in the modest
little front garden flooded my room. The flower-laden branches
of the cherry-trees peep into my windows, and now and then
the wind strews my writing-desk with the white petals. I have a
marvellous view on three sides. Five-peaked Beshtau looms
blue in the west like "the last cloud of a dispersed storm"; in
the north rises Mashuk like a shaggy Persian cap concealing
this part of the horizon. To the east the view is gayer: down
below the clean new town spreads colourfully before me, the
medicinal fountains babble and so do the multilingual crowds,
farther in the distance the massive amphitheatre of mountains
grows ever bluer and mistier, while on the fringe of the horizon
stretches the silvery chain of snow-capped peaks beginning
with Kazbek and ending with twin-peaked Elbrus. . . . It is a
joy to live in a country like this! A feeling of elation flows in
all my veins. The air is pure and fresh like the kiss of a child,
the sun is bright and the sky blue—what more could one
desire? What place is there left for passions, yearnings and
regrets? But it's time to go. I shall walk down to Elizabeth
Springs where they say the spa society congregates in the
mornings.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Upon reaching the centre of the town I took the boulevard
where I encountered several melancholy groups slowly
climbing the hill. That most of them were landed families from
the plains was obvious from the threadbare, old-fashioned
coats of the men and the dainty dresses of the wives and
daughters. They evidently had all the eligible young men at the
watering place marked out, for they looked at me with fond
curiosity. The Petersburg cut of my coat deceived them at first,
but discovering my army epaulettes they soon turned away in
disgust.
The wives of the local officials, the hostesses of the springs,
so to say, were more graciously inclined. They carry lorgnettes
and pay less attention to the uniform, for in the Caucasus they
have learned to find ardent hearts under brass buttons and
enlightened minds under white forage caps. These ladies are
very charming, and remain charming for a long time! Their
admirers are renewed every year, which perhaps explains the
secret of their indefatigable amiability. As I climbed up the
narrow path leading to Elizabeth Springs I passed a crowd of
men, both civilians and military, who, as I discovered later,
form a class in itself among those who keep vigil at the fount.
They drink, but not water, go out but little, philander in a
desultory way; they gamble and complain of boredom. They
are fops; they assume academic poses as they dip their
wickered tumblers into the sulphur water; the civilians flaunt
pale-blue cravats, and the armymen, ruffs showing above their
collars. They affect deep disdain for provincial society and sigh
at the thought of aristocratic drawing-rooms of the capital
which are closed to them.
Here at last is the well. . . . On a site nearby, a little redroofed building has been raised over the baths, and farther on, a
gallery to shelter the promenaders when it rains. Several
wounded officers—pale, sad-looking men—sat on a bench
holding their crutches in front of them. Several ladies were
briskly pacing back and forth, waiting for the water to take
effect. Among them were two or three pretty faces. Through the
avenues of vines that cover the slope of Mashuk I caught an
occasional glimpse of a gay bonnet evidently belonging to a
votaress of privacy for two as it was invariably accompanied
by an army cap or an ugly round hat. On a steep cliff where
there is a pavilion named the Aeolian Harp, sightseers were
aiming a telescope at Elbrus; among them were two tutors with
their charges who had come here in search of a cure for king's
evil.
Panting, I had stopped at the brink of the precipice and was
leaning against a corner of the building surveying the
picturesque locality when I suddenly heard a familiar voice
behind me:
"Pechorin! Been here long?"
I turned around and saw Grushnitsky. We embraced. I had
met him in a line unit. He had a bullet wound in the leg and had
left for the watering place a week earlier than I.
Grushnitsky is a cadet. He has served only a year and wears
a heavy soldier's greatcoat which he flaunts as his particular
brand of foppery. He has a soldier's Cross of St. George. He is
well-built, swarthy and dark-haired, and looks twenty-five
though he can scarcely be more than twenty-one. He has a way
of throwing his head back when talking, and he constantly
twirls his moustache with his left hand for his right is engaged
leaning on his crutch. His speech is glib and florid; he is one of
those who have a pompous phrase ready for every occasion,
who are unmoved by simple beauty and who grandly assume a
garb of extraordinary emotions, exalted passions and exquisite
anguish. They delight in creating an impression, and romantic
provincial ladies are infatuated with them to the point of
distraction. In their old age they become either peaceable
landlords or drunkards, sometimes both. Often their souls have
many kindly qualities but not a particle of poetry. Grushnitsky
used to have a passion for declaiming; he would shower you
under with words as soon as the conversation transcended the
bounds of everyday concepts, and I could never argue with
him. He neither answers your rebuttal nor listens to what you
have to say. As soon as you stop, he launches upon a long
tirade which on the face of it seems to have some bearing on
what you have said, but actually amounts only to a
continuation of his own argument.
He is rather witty and his epigrams are frequently amusing
but never pointed or malicious; he does not annihilate a person
with one word. He knows neither people nor their foibles, for
all his life he has been preoccupied with himself alone. His
object in life is to become the hero of a romance. So often has
he tried to make others believe he is a creature never intended
for this world and hence doomed to some kind of occult
suffering that he has practically convinced himself of it. That is
why he vaunts of his heavy soldier's greatcoat. I see through
him and he dislikes me for it, though on the face of it we are on
the friendliest of terms. Grushnitsky has a reputation for superb
courage; I have seen him in action: he brandishes his sabre, and
dashes forward shouting with his eyes shut. There is something
very un-Russian in that brand of gallantry!
I do not like him either, and I feel we are bound to fall foul
of each other one day with rueful consequences for one of us.
His coming to the Caucasus too was the result of his
romantic fanaticism. I am certain that on the eve of his
departure from his father's village he tragically announced to
some comely neighbour that he was not going merely to serve
in the army, but to seek death, because ... at this point he
probably covered his eyes with his hand and went on like this:
"No, you must not know the reason! Your pure soul would
shudder at the thought! And why should you? What am I to
you? Can you understand me?" and so on and so forth.
He told me himself that the reason why he enlisted in the K.
regiment will forever remain a secret between him and his
Maker.
And yet when he discards his tragic guise Grushnitsky can
be quite pleasant and amusing. I would like to see him in the
company of women, for I imagine that is when he would try to
be at his best.
We greeted each other as old friends. T began to ply him
with questions concerning life at the spa and the interesting
people there were to be met.
"We lead a rather prosaic life," he sighed. "Those who drink
the waters in the mornings are listless like all sick people, and
those who drink wine in the evenings are unbearable like all
people who enjoy good health. There is feminine company, but
it offers little consolation; they play whist, dress badly and
speak terrible French. This year Princess Ligovskaya with her
daughter are the only visitors from Moscow, but I have not met
them. My greatcoat is like a brand of ostracism. The sympathy
it evokes is as unwelcome as charity."
Just then two ladies walked past us toward the spring, one
elderly, the other young and slender. I could not see their faces
for the bonnets, but they were dressed in strict conformity with
the very best taste: everything was as it should be. The young
woman wore a high-necked pearl-grey dress; a dainty silk
kerchief encircled her supple neck. A pair of dark-brown shoes
encased her slender little feet up to the ankles so daintily that
even one uninitiated into the mysteries of beauty would have
caught his breath, if only in amazement. Her light but dignified
gait had something virginal about it that eluded definition yet
was perceptible to the eye. As she walked past us, that subtle
fragrance was wafted from her which sometimes is exhaled by
a note from a woman we love.
"That is Princess Ligovskaya," said Grushnitsky, "and her
daughter, whom she calls Mary in the English manner. They've
been here only three days."
"You seem to know her name already."
"Heard it quite by accident," he replied, colouring. "I must
confess I have no desire to meet them. These haughty
aristocrats think we armymen are savages. What is it to them if
there is an intellect under a numbered cap and a heart beneath a
thick greatcoat?"
"Poor greatcoat," said I, smiling. "And who is the
gentleman going up to them and so obligingly offering them a
tumbler?"
"Oh, that's the Moscow dandy Rayevich! He's a gambler, as
you can see by the heavy gold chain across his blue waistcoat.
And look at that thick cane—just like Robinson Crusoe's! Or
the beard he sports, and the haircut a la moujik."
"You seem to bear a grudge against the whole human race."
"And with good reason. . . . "
"Really?"
By this time the ladies had left the well and were again
passing us. Grushnitsky hastened to strike a dramatic pose with
the help of his crutch and replied loudly in French:
"Mon cher, je hais les hommes pour ne pas les mepriser, car
autrement la vie serait une farce trop degoutante."
The attractive Princess turned and bestowed on the speaker
a long and searching glance. It was an obscure kind of look, but
without a trace of mockery, on which I mentally congratulated
him from the bottom of my heart.
"This Princess Mary is most charming," I said to him. "Her
eyes are like velvet, yes, velvet. I would advise you to adopt
this expression when you talk about her eyes; the eyelashes,
both upper and lower, are so long that the sunbeams find no
reflection in her pupils. I love eyes like that—without a shine
in them, and so soft that they seem to be caressing you. By the
way, I think they are the only good point in her face. . . . Are
her teeth white? That is very important! It's pity she did not
smile at your grandiloquence."
"You talk about a charming woman as if she were an
English thoroughbred," said Grushnitsky indignantly.
"Mon cher" I replied, trying to fall into tone, "je meprise es
femmes pour ne pas les aimer, car autrement la vie serait un
melodrame trop ridicule."
I turned and walked off. For half an hour I strolled along
the vine-clad walks, along the limestone cliffs and among the
low bushes between them, until it grew hot and I hurried home.
As I passed by the sulphur spring I stopped to rest in the shade
of the covered gallery and thus became a witness of a rather
curious spectacle. This is how the actors were placed. The old
Princess was sitting with the Moscow fop on a bench in the
gallery and seemed to be engaged in a serious conversation.
The young Princess, having apparently drunk her last glassful
of water, was pacing thoughtfully up and down by the well.
Grushnitsky was standing at the well. There was no one else
around.
I went up closer and hid behind a corner of the gallery. Just
then Grushnitsky dropped his tumbler on the sand and tried to
stoop to pick it up, but his wounded leg made it hard for him.
Poor chap! How he tried, leaning against the crutch, but in
vain. His expressive face actually registered pain.
Princess Mary saw this better than I did.
Quicker than a bird she was at his side, bent down, picked
up the tumbler and handed it to him with an inexpressibly
sweet gesture; then she blushed furiously, cast a glance in the
direction of the gallery, but seeing that her mother had not
noticed anything, immediately regained her composure. When
Grushnitsky opened his mouth to thank her she was already far
away. A minute later she left the gallery in the company of her
mother and the dandy, but as she passed Grushnitsky she
assumed a most prim and proper air, not even turning her head
in his direction or noticing the fervent gaze with which he
escorted her until she disappeared behind the lime-trees of the
boulevard at the foot of the hill. . . . He caught a last glimpse
of her bonnet on the other side of the street as she ran into the
gateway of one of the finest houses in Pyatigorsk. Behind her
walked the old Princess, who bid farewell to Rayevich at the
gate.
Only now did the poor smitten cadet become aware of my
presence.
"Did you see it?" he asked, gripping my hand firmly. "She's
simply an angel!"
"Why?" asked I feigning utter innocence.
"Didn't you see?"
"Of course, I saw how she picked up your tumbler. If there
had been a park-keeper around he would have done the same,
only quicker in hopes of getting a tip. Though there is nothing
surprising that she took pity on you; you made such an awful
face when you stepped on your wounded leg. . . . "
"Weren't you moved when you saw her soul shining in her
eyes?"
"No."
I was lying, but I wanted to rouse him. I have an inborn
urge to contradict; my whole life has been a mere chain of sad
and futile opposition to the dictates of either heart or reason.
The presence of an enthusiast makes me as cold as a
midwinter's day, and I believe frequent association with a
listless phlegmatic would make me an impassioned dreamer. I
must also admit that momentarily an unpleasant but familiar
sensation lightly crept over my heart; that sensation was envy. I
say "envy" frankly, because I am accustomed to being honest
with myself. And it is unlikely that any young man (a man of
the world accustomed to indulging his vanities, of course),
who, having met a woman who attracted his idle fancy, would
not be unpleasantly impressed upon seeing her favour another
men no less a stranger than he.
Grushnitsky and I descended the hill in silence and walked
down the boulevard past the windows of the house which our
beauty had entered. She was sitting at the window. Tugging at
my sleeve, Grushnitsky gave her one of those mistily tender
looks that evoke so little response in women. I directed my
lorgnette at her and saw that Grushnitsky's glance brought a
smile to her face while my impertinent lorgnette made her very
angry. Indeed, how dare a Caucasian armyman level an eyeglass at a princess from Moscow?
May 13
The doctor dropped in to see me this morning. His name is
Werner, but he is a Russian. There is nothing surprising in that.
I once knew an Ivanov who was a German.
Werner is in many respects a remarkable man. He is a
sceptic and a materialist like most medical men, but he is also a
poet, and that quite in earnest—a poet in all his deeds and
frequently in words, though he never wrote two verses in his
life. He has studied the vital chords of the human heart the way
men study the sinews of a corpse, but he has never been able to
make use of his knowledge just as a splendid anatomist may
not be able to cure a fever. As a rule, Werner secretly laughed
at his patients, yet once I saw him weep over a dying soldier.
He was poor and dreamed of possessing millions, but he would
not have gone a step out of his way for the sake of money.
Once he told me that he would rather do an enemy a good turn
than a friend, because in the latter case it would amount to
profiting by one's charity, whereas hatred grows in proportion
to the generosity of the adversary. He had a malicious tongue,
and, branded by his epigrams, more than one good soul came
to be regarded as a vulgar fool. His competitors, envious
practitioners at the spa, spread a rumour that he drew
caricatures of his patients; the latter were furious and he lost
practically all his clientele. His friends, that is, all the really
decent people serving in the Caucasus, tried in vain to repair
his fallen prestige.
His appearance was of the kind that strikes one
disagreeably at first sight but subsequently becomes likeable
when the eye has learned to discern behind the irregular
features the impress of a soul that is tried and lofty. There have
been cases when women have fallen madly in love with men
like him and would not have exchanged their ugliness for the
beauty of the freshest and pinkest of Endymions. Women must
be given credit for possessing an instinct for spiritual beauty;
perhaps that is why men like Werner love women so
passionately.
Werner was short of stature, thin and as frail as a child. Like
Byron, he had one leg shorter than the other; his head was
disproportionately large; he wore his hair cropped close, and
the irregularities of his skull thus exposed would have
astounded a phrenologist by their queer combination of
contradictory inclinations. His small, black, ever restless eyes
probed your thoughts. He dressed immaculately and with good
taste, and his lean, small, sinewy hands were neatly gloved in
pale yellow. His coat, cravat and waistcoat were invariably
black. The young set called him Mephistopheles, and though he
pretended to be displeased by the appellation, in reality it
flattered his vanity. We soon understood each other and became
companions—for I am incapable of friendship. Between two
friends one is always the slave of the other, though frequently
neither will admit it; the slave I cannot be, and to dominate is
an arduous task since one must employ deception as well;
besides, I have the servants and the money! This is how we
became acquainted: I met Werner in S., in a large and
boisterous gathering of the younger set. Toward the end of the
evening the conversation took a philosophical and
metaphysical trend. We spoke about convictions, of which each
had his own.
"As for me, I am convinced of only one thing . . ." said the
doctor. "And what is that?" I asked, wishing to hear the opinion
of a man who had been silent till then.
"That some fine morning sooner or later I shall die," he
replied. "I am better off than you," said I. "I have another
conviction besides, which is that one exceedingly foul night I
had the misfortune to be born."
Everyone else was of the opinion that we were talking
nonsense, but really nobody had anything more clever to say.
From that moment we singled each other out from among the
crowd. We used to meet frequently and discuss abstract matters
in all seriousness until we both noticed that we were pulling
each other's leg. Then, after looking each other in the eye
significantly—the way Cicero tells us the Roman augurs did—
we would burst out laughing and separate satisfied with an
evening well spent.
I was lying on a divan, my eyes fixed upon the ceiling and
my hands behind my head, when Werner walked into my room.
He seated himself in a chair, stood his cane in a corner, yawned
and observed that it was getting hot outdoors. I replied that the
flies were bothering me, and we both fell silent.
"You will have noticed, my dear doctor," said I, "that
without fools the world would be very boring. . . . Now here
we are, two intelligent people; we know in advance that
everything can be argued about endlessly, and hence do not
argue; we know nearly all of each other's innermost thoughts; a
single word tells us a whole story, and we see the kernel of
each of our sentiments through a triple husk. Sad things strike
us as funny, funny things as sad, and generally speaking if you
want to know, we are rather indifferent to everything except
ourselves. Hence there can be no exchange of emotions and
ideas between us; we know all we want to know about each
other and do not wish to know more. That leaves only one
thing to talk about: the latest news. Haven't you any news to
tell me?"
Fatigued by the long speech, I closed my eyes and yawned.
"There is one idea in the balderdash you are talking," he
replied after a pause for thought.
"Two!" I replied.
"Tell me one of them and I will say what the other is."
"Good. You begin," said I, continuing to inspect the ceiling
and smiling inwardly.
"You would like to know some details about someone who
has arrived at the spa, and I can guess who it is you have in
mind because that person has already been inquiring about
you."
"Doctor! We definitely need not converse; we can read each
other's minds."
"Now the other one. . . . "
"The second idea is this: I would like to induce you to tell
me something; firstly, because listening is less tiring than
talking, secondly, because in listening one does not give
anything away, thirdly, because you may learn another man's
secret, and, fourthly, because clever people like you prefer a
listener to a talker. Now let's come to the point: what did
Princess Ligovskaya have to say to you about me?"
"Are you sure it was not Princess Mary?"
"Quite certain."
"Why?"
"Because Princess Mary asked about Grushnitsky."
"You have rare sagacity. The young Princess said she was
certain the young man in the ordinary soldier's greatcoat had
been degraded to the ranks on account of a duel. . . . "
"I hope you did not disabuse her mind of that pleasant
illusion. . . . "
"Naturally not."
"The plot thickens," I cried in elation, "and we shall see to
the denouement of the comedy. Fate apparently does not wish
me to be bored."
"I have a notion that poor Grushnitsky will end up as your
victim," said the doctor.
"And then what happened, doctor?"
"Princess Ligovskaya said your face was familiar. I
observed she must have met you somewhere in St. Petersburg
society, and mentioned your name. She knew about you. It
seems that your story made a sensation there. Then the Princess
went on to recount your adventures, probably spicing the
society gossip with her own opinions. Her daughter listened
with interest, visualizing you as the hero of a novel written in
the modern style. I did not contradict the Princess though I
knew she was talking nonsense."
"Worthy friend!" said I, extending my hand to him. The
doctor gripped it with feeling and continued.
"If you wish me to, I'll introduce you. . . . "
"My dear fellow!" said I, spreading my hands. "Have you
ever heard of heroes being formally presented? They make the
acquaintance of their beloved by rescuing her from certain
death. . . . "
"Do you really intend to court the Princess?"
"Not at all, quite the contrary! Doctor, I score at last, for
you do not understand me! Yet it is rather annoying just the
same," I continued after a moment's silence. "I make it a rule
never to disclose my own thoughts, and am very glad when
others divine them because that leaves me a loophole for
denying them when necessary. But you must describe mama
and daughter to me. What sort of people are they?"
"In the first place, the old Princess is a woman of fortyfive," replied Werner. "Her digestion is splendid, though her
blood is not quite in order; you can tell by the red spots on her
cheeks. The latter half of her life she has spent in Moscow
where inactivity has caused her to put on weight. She is fond of
spicy anecdotes and says improper things when her daughter is
out of the room. She told me that her daughter was as innocent
as a dove. Though what it had to do with me, I don't know. I
wanted to tell her that she might rest assured I would tell no
one about it! The Princess is taking the cure for rheumatism,
and the daughter the Lord knows what for; I told them both to
drink two glasses of sulphur water daily and bathe twice
weekly in it. The Princess apparently is unaccustomed to
ordering people about, and she respects the brains and
knowledge of her daughter, who has read Byron in English and
knows algebra, for it seems that the young ladies of Moscow
have taken up learning—good for them, I should say. In
general our men are so ill-mannered that intelligent women
probably find it unbearable to flirt with them. The old Princess
is very fond of young men, but Princess Mary regards them
with a certain contempt— an old Moscow habit. In Moscow
they go in for forty-year-old wits only."
"Were you ever in Moscow, doctor?"
"Yes, I was. Had a sort of practice there.'"
"Please go on."
"I believe I have said everything there is to say. . . . Oh
yes, one more thing: Princess Mary appears to be fond of
discussing sentiments, emotions and the like. She spent a
winter in Petersburg, but the city, and particularly its society,
did not please her. Evidently she was given a cool reception."
"You didn't meet anybody else at their place today, did
you?"
"Yes, I did. There was an adjutant, a starched guardsman,
and a lady, one of the new arrivals, some relative of the
Princess' husband, a very pretty woman but a very sick one, I
believe. You didn't happen to see her at the spring? She is of
medium height, blonde, with regular features, a consumptive
complexion, and a little dark mole on her right cheek. I was
struck by the expressiveness of her face."
"A mole?" I muttered. "Is it possible?"
The doctor looked at me and laying his hand on my heart
said solemnly: "You know her." My heart indeed was beating
faster than usual.
"It's your turn to exult now," said I. "Only I trust that you
will not give me away. I have not seen her yet, but I believe I
recognize in the portrait you have painted a woman I loved in
the old days. . . . Don't tell her a word about me, and if she
asks you, speak ill of me."
"As you wish," said Werner, shrugging his shoulders.
When he left, a terrible sadness flooded my soul. Was it fate
that brought us together in the Caucasus, or had she come on
purpose, knowing she would find me here? What would the
meeting be like? And was it she, after all? My presentiments
had never deceived me. There is not another person on earth
over whom the past holds such sway as over me. Every
remembrance of a past sorrow or joy sends a pang through my
heart and invariably strikes the very same chords. I am stupidly
constituted, for I forget nothing—nothing!
After dinner I went down to the boulevard at about six and
found a crowd there. The Princess and her daughter were
seated on a bench surrounded by a flock of young men who
were paying them constant attention. I found myself another
bench some distance away, stopped two officers I knew and
began telling them a story. Apparently it amused them, because
they roared with laughter like madmen. Curiosity drew to my
bench some of the gallants who had clustered around the
Princess; then little by little the rest too deserted her and joined
my group. I talked incessantly, telling anecdotes that were witty
to the point of stupidity and ridiculing the queer characters that
passed by with a malice bordering on viciousness. Thus I
continued to amuse my audience until sunset. Several times the
young Princess strolled arm-in-arm with her mother past me,
accompanied by a limping old man, and several times her gaze
rested on me, expressing vexation while trying to convey
indifference.
"What was he telling you?" she asked one of the young men
who returned to her out of sheer politeness. "It must have been
a very thrilling story—about his battle exploits no doubt." She
spoke rather loudly, obviously with the intention of slighting
me. "Aha," thought I, "you are thoroughly annoyed, my dear
Princess! Wait, there is more to come!"
Grushnitsky has been stalking her like a wild beast, never
letting her out of his sight. I daresay that tomorrow he will ask
someone to present him to Princess Ligovskaya. She will be
very glad to meet him, for she is bored.
May 16
During the past two days things have been moving fast.
Princess Mary decidedly hates me. I have already been told
two or three rather biting but nevertheless very flattering
epigrams pointed at me. It strikes her as very odd that I who am
so accustomed to good society and on such intimate terms with
her Petersburg cousins and aunts should make no effort to
make her acquaintance. We see each other every day at the
spring and on the boulevard, and I do my best to decoy her
admirers, the glittering adjutants, pallid Moscovites and others
—with almost invariable success. I have always loathed
entertaining guests, but now I have a full house every day, for
dinner, supper and a game of cards, and lo, my champagne
triumphs over the magnetism of her eyes!
Yesterday I met her at Chelakshov's shop where she was
bargaining for a splendid Persian rug. The Princess pleaded
with her mother not to begrudge the money, for the rug would
look so well in her room. . . . I overbid forty rubles and
walked away with the rug, and was rewarded with a look of the
most bewitching fury. At dinner-time I deliberately had my
Cherkess horse led past her windows with the rug thrown over
its back. Werner who was visiting them at the time told me that
the effect of the spectacle was most dramatic. The Princess
wants to raise a levy against me; I have already noticed that in
her presence two of the adjutants give me very curt nods,
though they dine with me every day.
Grushnitsky has assumed a mysterious air; he walks with
his hands behind his back oblivious of everybody. His leg has
suddenly healed so that he scarcely limps. He found an
occasion to engage the old Princess in conversation and to pay
a compliment to Princess Mary; the latter apparently is not too
discriminating, for ever since she has been responding to his
bows with the most charming smile.
"You are sure you do not wish to meet the Ligovskys?" he
asked me yesterday.
"Positive."
"Really! It's the pleasantest house at the spa. All the best
local society. . . . "
"My dear friend, I'm frightfully fed up with non-local
society, let alone the local. Have you been calling on them?"
"Not yet. I have no more than talked with the Princess once
or twice. You know how unpleasant it is to fish for an
invitation, though it is done here. . . . It would be another
matter if I had epaulettes. . . . "
"My dear fellow! You are far more interesting as you are.
You simply do not know how to take advantage of your
favourable position. Don't you know that a soldier's greatcoat
makes you a hero and a martyr in the eyes of any sensitive
young lady?"
Grushnitsky smiled complacently.
"What nonsense!" he said.
"I am sure," I went on, "that the Princess has fallen in love
with you."
He blushed to the roots of his hair and pouted.
0 vanity! Thou art the lever with which Archimedes hoped
to raise the globe.
"You're always joking," he said, pretending to be angry. "In
the first place she barely knows me. . . . "
"Women love only the men they don't know."
"But I have no particular desire to please her. I merely wish
to make the acquaintance of a pleasant household, and it would
indeed be absurd to entertain any hopes whatsoever. . . . Now
you Petersburg lady-killers are another matter: you only have
to look once for a woman to melt. . . . By the way, Pechorin,
do you know the young Princess spoke of you?"
"What? Has she already spoken to you about me?"
"You have no reason to rejoice, though. Once quite by
chance I entered into conversation with her at the spring; her
third remark was, 'Who is that gentleman with the unpleasant,
heavy-eyed expression? He was with you when. . . . ' She
blushed and was reluctant to mention the day, recalling her
charming little exploit. 'You need not mention the day,' I
replied, 'for I shall always remember it. . . . ' Pechorin, my
friend, I cannot congratulate you, for she thinks ill of you. . . .
It is a pity, really, because Mary is very charming!"
It must be noted that Grushnitsky is one of those who in
speaking of a woman they hardly know call her my Mary or
my Sophie if only she has the good fortune to attract them.
Assuming a serious mien I replied:
"Yes, she is rather good-looking. . . . Only take care,
Grushnitsky! Russian young ladies for the most part go in only
for Platonic love with no intentions of matrimony, and Platonic
love is most disturbing. It seems to me that the Princess is one
of those women who wish to be amused; if she is bored for two
minutes in your company you are irrevocably doomed. Your
silence must arouse her curiosity, your conversation must never
completely satisfy her; you must keep her in a state of suspense
all the time; ten times she will defy public opinion for your
sake and call it a sacrifice, and as a recompense she will begin
to torment you and end up by saying simply that she cannot
tolerate you. If you do not gain the ascendancy over her, even
her first kiss will not give you the right to a second. She will
flirt with you to her heart's content and a year or two later
marry an ugly beast in obedience to her mother's will; then she
will begin to assure you that she is unhappy, that she had loved
only one man—that is, you—but that fate had not ordained that
she be joined to him because he wore a soldier's greatcoat,
though beneath that thick grey garment there beat an ardent and
noble heart. . . . "
Grushnitsky smote the table with his fist and began to pace
up and down the room.
I shook with laughter inwardly and even smiled a couple of
times, but luckily he did not notice it. He is clearly in love, for
he has become more credulous than ever: he even wears a new
niello-silver ring of local workmanship, which struck me as
suspicious. On closer inspection what do you think I saw? The
name Mary engraved in small letters on the inside and next to it
the date when she picked up that famous tumbler. I said
nothing of my discovery; I do not want to extract any
confessions from him; I want him to make me his confidant by
his own choice—and that's when I am going to enjoy myself. . .
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Today I got up late, and by the time I reached the spring no
one was there. It was getting hot, white fluffy clouds raced
across the sky away from the snow-capped mountains
promising a thunderstorm. Mashuk's summit was smoking like
an extinguished torch, and around it grey tatters of clouds
arrested in their flight and seemingly caught in the mountain
brambles, writhed and crawled like serpents. The atmosphere
was charged with electricity. I took the vine-flanked avenue
leading to the grotto; I felt depressed. I was thinking of the
young woman with the mole on her cheek whom the doctor
had mentioned. What was she doing here? And was it sue? And
why did I think it was she? Why was I so certain about it? Are
there so few women with moles on their cheeks? Ruminating
thus I reached the grotto. A woman was seated on a stone
bench in the cool shade of its roof; she was wearing a straw
hat, a black shawl was wrapped round her shoulders, and her
head was lowered so that the hat concealed her face. I was
about to turn back so as not to disturb her meditations when she
looked up at me.
"Vera!" I cried out involuntarily.
She started and turned pale. "I know you were here," she
said. I sat down next to her and took her hand. A long-forgotten
tremor shot through my veins at the sound of that sweet voice.
Her deep, tranquil eyes looked straight into mine; in them I
could read distress and something akin to a reproach.
"We have not seen each other for so long," said I.
"Yes, and we both have changed a great deal."
"You mean, you do not love me any more!"
"I am married!" she said.
"Again? Some years ago there was the same reason, but in
spite of that. . . . "
She snatched her hand away and her cheeks flamed.
"Perhaps you are in love with your second husband?"
She made no reply and turned away.
"Or maybe he is very jealous?"
Silence.
"Well, he must be a fine, handsome fellow, very rich, I
suppose, and you are afraid that. . . . " I looked at her and was
startled; her face expressed dire distress, and tears glistened in
her eyes.
"Tell me," she whispered at last, "does it give you so much
pleasure to torment me? I ought to hate you. Ever since we
have known each other you have brought me nothing but
pain. . . . " Her voice shook, and she leaned towards me resting
her head on my breast.
"Perhaps," I thought, "that is why you loved me, for joy is
forgotten, but sorrow never. . . . "
I pressed her close to me and we remained thus for a long
time. Then our lips met and merged in a burning, rapturous
kiss; her hands were ice-cold, her head feverishly hot. There
began one of those conversations that make no sense on paper,
that cannot be repeated or even remembered, for the import of
words is substituted and enriched by that of sounds, just as in
Italian opera.
She is resolved that I should not meet her husband, who is
the lame old man I caught a glimpse of on the boulevard. She
married him for the sake of her son. He is rich and suffers from
rheumatism. I did not allow myself a single disparaging remark
about him, for she respects him like a father—and will deceive
him as a husband. . . . A queer thing, the human heart, and a
woman's heart in particular!
Vera's husband, Semyon Vasilyevich G...V, is a distant
relative of Princess Ligovskaya. They are next door
neighbours, and Vera is often at the Princess'. I promised her
that I would meet the Ligovskys and dangle after Princess
Mary so as to divert attention from her. This does not interfere
with my plans at all and I will have a good time. . . .
A good time! Yes, I have already passed that period of
spiritual life when people seek happiness alone and when the
heart must needs love someone passionately; now I only want
to be loved, and then only by very few. As a matter of fact, I
believe one constant attachment would suffice for me—a
wretched sentimental habit!
It has always struck me as queer that I had never become
the slave of the woman I loved; on the contrary, I have always
acquired an invincible sway over their mind and heart without
any effort on my part. Why is that? Was it because I have never
particularly prized anything and they have been afraid to let me
°lip out of their hands for a moment? Or was it the magnetic
appeal of physical strength? Or simply because I have never
met a woman with strength of character?
I must admit that I do not care for women with a mind of
their own—it does not suit them!
Though I recall now that once, but only once, I loved a
woman with a strong mind I never could conquer. . . . We
parted enemies, yet had I met her five years later the parting
might have been quite different. . . .
Vera is ill, very ill, although she will not admit it; I am
afraid she has consumption or the disease they call fievre lente
—not a Russian ailment at all and hence it has no name in our
language.
The thunderstorm overtook us in the grotto and kept us
there another half an hour. She did not make me vow to be
faithful to her, nor did she ask me whether I had loved others
since we parted. . . . She trusted me again as wholeheartedly
as before—and I shall not deceive her; she is the only woman
in the world I would not have the heart to deceive. I know that
we shall part again soon, perhaps forever. We shall both go our
different ways to the grave, but I shall always cherish her
memory. I have always told her so and she believes me, though
she says she does not.
At length we parted, and I stood there following her with
my eyes until her bonnet disappeared behind the bushes and
rocks. My heart contracted painfully, just as when we parted
the first time. Oh, how I revelled in this feeling! Was it youth
with its beneficent tempests reasserting itself, or merely its
farewell glance, a parting gift—a souvenir? And to think that I
still look like a boy; though my face is pale, it is still fresh, my
limbs are supple and graceful, my locks thick and curly, eyes
flashing, and my blood courses swiftly through the veins. . . .
On coming home, I mounted my horse and galloped into
the steppe, for I love riding a mettlesome horse through the tall
grass, with the desert wind in my face, greedily drinking in the
fragrant air and gazing into the blue distance to discern hazy
outlines of objects that grow more distinct every moment.
Whatever sorrow weighs down the heart or anxiety plagues the
mind, it all is immediately dispersed, and a peace settles over
the soul as physical fatigue prevails over mental unrest. There
are no feminine eyes I would not forget when gazing on the
wooded mountains bathed in the southern sunshine,
contemplating the blue sky, or listening to the roar of the
torrent falling from crag to crag.
I should imagine the Cossack sentinels, standing drowsily
in their watchtowers, must have been sorely puzzled on seeing
me galloping along without aim or drift, for they most likely
took me for a Cherkess on account of ray costume. As a matter
of fact I had been told that mounted and wearing Cherkess
costume I look more like a Kabardian than many Kabardians.
And indeed, as far as this noble battle garb is concerned I am a
perfect dandy: not an extra bit of braiding, costly weapons in
the simplest setting, the fur on my cap neither too long nor too
short, leggings and soft-leather boots fitting perfectly, white
beshmet and dark-brown Cherkess coat. I practised long the
mountaineers' way of sitting a horse; and nothing so flatters my
vanity as praise for my ability to ride a horse as the Caucasians
do. I keep four horses, one for myself and three for my friends,
so as to avoid the boredom of riding out alone through the
fields, but though they are pleased to have my horses to ride
they never ride with me. It was already six o'clock in the
afternoon when I remembered that it was time for dinner;
moreover, my horse was exhausted. I rode out onto the road
leading from Pyatigorsk to the German colony where the spa
society frequently goes en piquenique. The road winds its way
through the shrubbery, dipping into shallow gullies where
noisy rivulets flow in the shadow of the tall grasses; all around
are the towering blue terraces of Beshtau, Zmeinaya,
Zheleznaya and Lysaya mountains. I had stopped in one of
these gullies to water my horse when a noisy and brilliant
cavalcade appeared down the road; there were ladies in black
and sky-blue riding habits and gentlemen in garb that was a
mixture of Cherkess and Nizhni-Novgorod. Grushnitsky and
Princess Mary rode in front.
Ladies who come to take the waters still believe the stories
of Cherkess raids in broad daylight, and that probably explains
why Grushnitsky had belted a sabre and a pair of pistols over
his soldier's greatcoat; he looked rather ridiculous in these
heroic vestments. A tall bush concealed me from them, but I
had a perfect view through the foliage and could tell by the
expression of their faces that the conversation was in a
sentimental vein. Finally they neared the dip in the road.
Grushnitsky gripped the reins of the Princess' horse, and now I
could hear the end of their conversation:
"And you wish to remain in the Caucasus all your life?"
said the Princess.
"What is Russia to me?" replied her escort. "A country
where thousands of people will despise me because they are
wealthier than I, whereas here—why, here this thick greatcoat
was no obstacle to my making your acquaintance. . . . "
"On the contrary . . ." said the Princess, blushing.
Grushnitsky looked pleased. He continued:
"Here my days will flow thick and fast and unnoticed under
the bullets of barbarians, and if only God should send me each
year one bright feminine glance, one like. . . . "
By this time they drew level with me; I struck my horse
with the whip and rode out from behind the bushes.
"Mon dieu, un Circassien!" cried the Princess in terror.
To reassure her I replied in French, with a slight bow:
"Ne craignez rien, madams, je ne suis pas plus dangereux
que votre cavalier."
She was thrown into confusion—I wonder why? Because of
her mistake, or because she thought my reply insolent? I wish
indeed that the latter were the case. Grushnitsky glanced at me
with displeasure.
Late that night, that is, about eleven o'clock, I went for a
walk along the lime avenue of the boulevard. The town was
fast asleep, and only here and there a light shone in a window.
On three sides loomed the black ridges of the spurs of Mashuk,
on whose summit lay an ominous cloud; the moon was rising
in the east; in the distance the snow-capped summits glistened
in a silvery fringe. The cries of sentries intermingled with the
noise of the hot springs now released for the night. At times the
ringing hoofbeats echoed down the street accompanied by the
creaking of a covered ox-waggon and the plaintive chant of a
Tatar refrain. I sat down on a bench and sank into thought. I felt
a need to unburden my thoughts in a friendly talk . . . but with
whom? What was Vera doing now, I wondered. I would have
given much to press her hand just then.
Suddenly I heard quick, uneven steps. . . . Probably
Grushnitsky ... and so it was.
"Where have you been?"
"At Princess Ligovskaya's," he said gravely. "How
beautifully Mary sings!"
"You know what," said I, "I'll wager she does not know you
are a cadet, but thinks you are a degraded officer."
"Maybe. What do I care!" he said absently.
"Well, I just mentioned it. . . . "
"Do you know that you made her terribly angry? She
thought it was downright insolence on your part. I had a stiff
job trying to assure her that you are so well bred and so much
at home in society that you could not have had any intention of
insulting her. She says you have an impudent look and must be
very conceited."
"She is right. . . . You seem to be taking her part, don't
you?"
"I'm sorry I haven't won that right yet."
"Oho!" thought I. "Evidently he already has hopes. . . . "
"It'll only be worse for you," Grushnitsky went on. "Now it
will be hard for you to meet them—what a pity! It is one of the
pleasantest houses I know. . . . "
I smiled inwardly.
"The pleasantest house for me just now is my own," said I
yawning, and rose to go.
"Still you must admit that you regret it?"
"What nonsense! I could be at the Princess' tomorrow night
if I wish. . . . "
"We'll see about that. . . . "
"To please you I can even pay court to the Princess. . . . "
"That is, if she is willing to talk to you. . . . "
"I shall wait till she gets bored with your conversation. . . .
Good night!"
"And I'll go for a prowl—couldn't fall asleep for anything
now. . . . Look here, let's go to the restaurant, one can gamble
there. . . . Violent sensations are what I need tonight."
"I hope you lose. . . . "
I went home.
May 21
Nearly a week has passed and I have not met the Ligovskys
yet. Am waiting for an opportunity. Grushnitsky follows
Princess Mary about like a shadow, and they talk incessantly. I
wonder when she'll get tired of him. Her mother takes no notice
of what is going on because he is not eligible. There is the logic
of mothers for you! I have caught two or three tender looks—
this must be put a stop to.
Yesterday Vera made her first appearance at the spring.
Since our meeting in the grotto she has not left the house. We
dipped our tumblers into the water at the same time and as she
bent down she whispered to me:
"You don't want to go to the Ligovskys'! It is the only place
where we can meet."
A reproach—how boring! But I deserved it.
By the way, there is a subscription ball at the restaurant
hall, and I intend to dance the mazurka with Princess Mary.
May 29
The restaurant hall was transformed into a Nobles' Club
hall. By nine o'clock everybody was there. Princess Ligovskaya
and her daughter were among the last to arrive. Many of the
ladies eyed Princess Mary with envy and ill will, for she
dresses with very good taste. Those who consider themselves
the local aristocrats concealed their envy and attached
themselves to her. What else could be expected? Wherever
there is feminine society, there is an immediate division into
the upper and lower circles. Grushnitsky stood among the
crowd outside the window, pressing his face to the glass and
devouring his goddess with his eyes; in passing she gave him a
barely perceptible nod. He beamed like the sun. . . . The first
dance was a polonaise; then the orchestra struck up a waltz.
Spurs jingled and coat-tails whirled.
I stood behind a stout lady under a rose-coloured plumage.
The splendour of her gown was reminiscent of the farthingale
age and the blotchiness of her coarse skin of the happy epoch
of the black-taffeta beauty spots. The biggest wart on her neck
was concealed beneath a clasp. She was saying to her partner, a
captain of dragoons:
"This Princess Ligovskaya is a minx. Think of it, she
bumped into me and did not bother to apologize, and actually
turned round to look at me through her lorgnette. . . . C'est
impayable! And what has she got to give herself airs for? It
would do her good to be taught a lesson. . . . "
"Leave it to me!" replied the obliging captain and repaired
to another room.
I went over at once to the Princess and asked for the waltz,
taking advantage of the freedom of the local customs which
allow one to dance with strangers.
She was scarcely able to suppress a smile and thus conceal
her triumph, but quickly enough she managed to assume a
totally indifferent and even severe mien. She carelessly laid her
hand on my shoulder, tilted her head a bit to one side, and off
we started. I know no other waist so voluptuous and supple.
Her sweet breath caressed my face; now and then a ringlet
broke loose from its companions in the whirl of the dance and
brushed my burning cheek. . . . I made three turns round the
room. (She waltzes delightfully.) She was panting, her eyes
looked blurred and her parted lips could hardly whisper the
necessary "Merci, monsieur."
After a few minutes of silence I said, assuming the
humblest of expressions:
"I have heard, Princess, that while still an utter stranger to
you, I had the misfortune to evoke your displeasure, that you
found me impertinent. . . . Is that really true?"
"And you would like to strengthen that opinion now?" she
replied, with an ironical little grimace that, incidentally,
matched well the quick mobility of her features.
"If I had the audacity to offend you in any way, will you
allow me the greater audacity of asking your forgiveness?
Really, I should like very much to prove that you were
mistaken in your opinion of me. . . . "
"That will be a rather difficult task for you. . . . "
"Why?"
"Because you don't come to our house and these balls
probably will not be repeated frequently."
That means, thought I, their doors are closed to me for all
time.
"Do you know, Princess," said I with a shade of annoyance,
"that one should never spurn a repentant sinner, for out of sheer
desperation he may become doubly sinful. . . and then. . . . "
Laughter and whispering around us made me break off and
look round. A few paces away stood a group of men, among
them the captain of dragoons who had expressed his hostile
intentions toward the charming Princess. He seemed to be
highly pleased with something, rubbing his hands, laughing
loudly and exchanging winks with his comrades. Suddenly a
gentleman in a tailcoat and with a long moustache and a red
face stepped out of their midst and walked unsteadily toward
the Princess. He was obviously drunk. Stopping in front of the
bewildered Princess, with his hands behind his back, he
directed his bleary grey eyes at her and said in a wheezy treble:
"Permettez ... oh, dash it ... I just want to have the
mazurka. . . . "
"What do you want, sir?" she said with a tremor in her
voice, casting about a beseeching glance. But, alas, her mother
was far away, nor were there any of the gallants she knew
nearby, excepting one adjutant who, I believe, saw what was
going on, but hid behind the crowd to avoid being involved in
an unpleasant scene.
"Well, well!" said the drunken gentleman, winking at the
captain of dragoons who was spurring him on with
encouraging signs. "You would rather not? I once more have
the honour of inviting you pour mazure. . . . Maybe you think
I'm drunk? That's all right! Dance all the better, I assure you. . .
. "
I saw she was on the verge of fainting from terror and
mortification.
I stepped up to the intoxicated gentleman, gripped him
firmly by the arm and looking him straight in the eyes asked
him to go away, because, I added, the Princess had already
promised me the mazurka.
"Oh, I see! Another time, then!" he said, with a laugh, and
rejoined his cronies who, looking rather crestfallen, guided him
out of the room.
I was rewarded with a charming glance.
The Princess went over to her mother and told her what had
happened, and the latter sought me out in the crowd to thank
me. She told me that she knew my mother and was a friend of a
half a dozen of my aunts.
"I simply cannot understand how it is we haven't met
before," she added, "though you must admit that it's your own
fault. You hold yourself so aloof you know, really. I hope the
atmosphere of my drawing-room will dispel your spleen. What
do you say?"
I replied with one of those polite phrases everyone must
have in store for occasions like this.
The quadrilles dragged out interminably.
Finally the mazurka started and I sat down beside the young
Princess.
I made no reference to the drunken gentleman, nor to my
previous conduct, nor yet to Grushnitsky. The impression the
unpleasant incident had made on her gradually dispersed, her
face glowed, and she chatted charmingly. Her conversation was
pointed without pretensions to wit, it was vivacious and free of
restraint, and some of her observations were profound indeed. .
. . I let her understand in a confused, rambling sort of way that
I had long been attracted by her. She bent her head and blushed
faintly.
"You are a strange man!" she said presently with a
constrained smile, raising her velvety eyes to me.
"I did not wish to meet you," I continued, "because you are
surrounded by too great a crowd of admirers and I was afraid it
might engulf me completely."
"'You had nothing to fear. They are all exceedingly
tiresome. . . . "
"All of them? Certainly not all?"
She looked at me closely as if trying to recall something,
then blushed faintly again and finally said in a decided tone:
"All of them!"
"Even my friend Grushnitsky?"
"Is he your friend?" she asked dubiously.
"He is."
"He, certainly, cannot be classed as a bore."
"But an unfortunate, perhaps?" said I, laughingly.
"Of course! Why are you amused? I would like to see you
in his place."
"Why? I was a cadet once myself, and believe me, that was
the finest period of my life!"
"Is he a cadet?" she asked quickly, adding a moment later:
"And I thought... "
"What did you think?"
"Nothing, nothing at all. . . . Who is that lady?"
The conversation took a different turn and this subject was
not resumed. The mazurka ended and we parted—until we
should meet again. The ladies went home. Going in for supper,
I met Werner.
"Aha," he said, "so that's that! And you said you would only
make the Princess' acquaintance by rescuing her from certain
death?"
"I did better," I replied, "I saved her from fainting at the
ball!"
"What happened? Tell me!"
"No, you will have to guess, 0 you who divine everything
under the sun!"
May 30
I was walking on the boulevard about seven o'clock in the
evening. Grushnitsky, seeing me from afar, came over, a
ridiculously rapturous light gleaming in his eye. He clasped my
hand tightly and said in a tragic tone:
"I thank you, Pechorin. . . . You understand me, don't
you?"
"No, I don't. In any case there is nothing to thank me for," I
replied,
for I really had no good deed on my conscience.
"Why, what about yesterday? Have you forgotten? Mary
told me everything. . . . "
"You don't say you already share everything in common?
And gratitude too?"
"Listen," said Grushnitsky with an impressive air. "Please
don't make fun of my love if you wish to remain my friend. . . .
You see. I love her madly ... and I believe, I hope, that she
loves me too. . . . I have a favour to ask of you: you will be
visiting them this evening, promise me to observe everything. I
know you are experienced in these matters and you know
women better than I do. 0 women, women! Who really does
understand them? Their smiles disavow their glances, their
words promise and beguile, but the tone of their voice repulses.
They either divine in a flash your innermost thought or they do
not grasp the most obvious hint. . . . Take the Princess, for
instance: yesterday her eyes glowed with passion when they
dwelt on me but now they are lustreless and cold. . . . "
"That perhaps is the effect of the waters," replied I. "You
always look at the seamy side of things . . . you materialist!" he
added scornfully. "But let us get down to other matters."
Pleased with this bad pun, his spirits rose.
At nine o'clock we went together to the Princess". In
passing Vera's windows I saw her looking out, and we
exchanged a cursory glance. She entered the Ligovskys'
drawing-room soon after us. The old Princess introduced her to
me as a kinswoman. Tea was served, there were many guests,
and the conversation was general. I did my best to charm the
old Princess, told jokes and made her laugh heartily several
times; her daughter too wanted to laugh more than once, but
she suppressed the desire so as not to abandon the role she
assumed, for she believes that langour is becoming to her—and
perhaps she is right. I believe Grushnitsky was very glad that
my gaiety did not infect her.
After tea we all repaired to the sitting-room.
"Are you pleased with my obedience, Vera?" I asked as I
passed her.
She gave me a look full of love and gratitude. I am used to
these glances; but there was a time when they were my heart's
delight. Princess Ligovskaya made her daughter sit down to the
piano and everybody begged her to sing. I said nothing, and
taking advantage of the hubbub withdrew to a window with
Vera who intimated that she had something to say of great
importance to both of us. It turned out to be nonsense.
My indifference did not please the young Princess,
however, as I could guess by the one angry flashing glance she
gave me. . . . How well do I understand this dumb but eloquent
conversational means, so brief yet so forceful!
She sang: her voice is pleasant but she sings badly ... as a
matter of fact, I did not listen. But Grushnitsky, with his elbows
on the piano facing the Princess, devoured her with his eyes,
mumbling "Charmant! Delicieux!" over and over again.
"Listen," Vera was saying, "I do not want you to make the
acquaintance of my husband, but you must get into the old
Princess' good graces; you can do it easily, you can do anything
you wish. We shall meet only here. . . . "
"Nowhere else?"
She coloured and went on:
"You know I am your slave, I never could resist you. And I
will be punished for it. Because you will cease to love me! At
least I want to save my reputation . . . not because of myself,
you know that very well. But please don't torment me as before
with idle doubts and feigned indifference; I may die soon, for I
feel I am growing weaker day by day . . . but in spite of that I
cannot think of the life beyond, I think only of you. You men
do not understand the rapture one can find in a glance or a
handclasp, but, I swear to you, the sound of your voice fills me
with a deep, strange feeling of joy as no passionate kisses ever
could do."
In the meantime Princess Mary had stopped singing. A
chorus of praise broke out around her. I walked up to her last
and said something very casual about her voice.
She pouted and made a mock curtsy.
"It is all the more flattering to me," she said, "because you
weren't listening at all. But perhaps you do not care for music?"
"On the contrary, I do, particularly after dinner."
"Grushnitsky is right when he says that your tastes are most
prosaic. Even I can sec that you appreciate music from the
point of view of the gourmand. . . . "
"You are wrong again. I am no gourmand and I have a poor
digestion. Nevertheless, music after dinner lulls you to sleep
and a nap after dinner is good for you; hence I like music in the
medical sense. In the evening, on the contrary, it excites my
nerves too much, and I find myself either too depressed or too
gay. Both are tedious when there is no good reason either to
mope or to rejoice; besides to be downcast in company is
ridiculous and excessive gaiety is in bad taste. . . . "
She walked off without waiting for me to finish and sat
down beside Grushnitsky. The two engaged in a sentimental
conversation: the Princess seemed to respond to his sapient
saying in an absent-minded, rather inept, way, though she
simulated interest, and he glanced at her every now and then
with a look of surprise as if trying to fathom the cause of the
inner turmoil reflected in her troubled eyes.
But I have unravelled your secret, my charming Princess, so
beware! You wish to repay me in the same currency by
wounding my vanity—but you will not succeed in doing so!
And if you declare war on me, I shall be ruthless.
Several times in the course of the evening I deliberately
tried to join in their conversation, but she countered my
remarks rather drily, and I finally withdrew feigning
resentment. The Princess was triumphant, and so was
Grushnitsky. Triumph, my friends, while you may . . . you have
not long to triumph! What will happen? I have a presentiment. .
. . Upon meeting a woman I have always been able to tell
without error whether she will fall in love with me or not. . . .
The remainder of the evening I spent with Vera, and we
talked our fill about the past. I really do not know why she
loves me so. Especially since she is the only woman who has
ever completely understood me with all my petty frailties and
evil passions. . . . Can evil indeed be so attractive?
I left together with Grushnitsky. Outside he took my arm
and after a long silence said:
"Well, what do you say?"
I wanted to tell him, "You are a fool," but restrained myself
and merely shrugged my shoulders.
June 6
All these days I have not once departed from my system.
The Princess is beginning to enjoy my conversation. I told her
some of the curious incidents of my life, and she is beginning
to regard me as an unusual person. I mock at everything under
the sun, emotions in particular, and this is beginning to frighten
her. She does not dare to launch upon sentimental debates with
Grushnitsky when I am present, and already on several
occasions she has replied to him with an ironical smile. Yet
each time Grushnitsky approaches her I assume a humble air
and leave the two alone. The first time I did so she was glad, or
tried to look pleased; the second time she lost patience with
me, and the third time with Grushnitsky.
"You have very little pride!" she told me yesterday. "Why
do you think I prefer Grushnitsky's society?"
I replied that I was sacrificing my own pleasure for a
friend's happiness.
"And my pleasure as well," she added.
I looked at her intently and assumed an air of gravity. Then
for the rest of the day I did not address her. . . . She was
pensive last night, and even more wistful this morning at the
spring. As I walked up to her, she was listening absently to
Grushnitsky who, I believe, was harping on the beauties of
nature, but as soon as she saw me she began to laugh heartily
(rather irrelevantly), pretending not to notice me. I withdrew
some distance away and watched her out of the corner of my
eye; she turned away from her companion and yawned twice.
There is no doubt about it: she is bored with Grushnitsky. But I
shall not speak to her for another two days.
June 11
I often ask myself why it is that I so persistently seek to win
the love of a young girl whom I do not wish to seduce and
whom I shall never marry. Why this feminine coquetry? Vera
loves me better than Princess Mary ever will. Were she an
unconquerable beauty, the difficulty of the undertaking might
serve as an inducement. . . .
But far from it! Hence this is not the restless craving for
love that torments us in the early years of our youth and casts
us from one woman to another until we meet one who cannot
endure us; this is the beginning of our constancy—the true
unending passion that may mathematically be represented by a
line extending from a point into space, the secret of whose
endlessness consists merely in the impossibility of attaining the
goal, that is, the end.
What is it that spurs me on? Envy of Grushnitsky? Poor
chap! He does not deserve it. Or is it the result of that
malicious but indomitable impulse to annihilate the blissful
illusions of a fellow man in order to have the petty satisfaction
of telling him when in desperation he appeals to us:
"My friend, the same thing happened to me! Yet as you see,
I dine, sup and sleep well, and, I hope, will be able to die
without any fuss or tears!"
And yet to possess a young soul that has barely burgeoned
out is a source of unfathomable delight. It is like a flower
whose richest perfume goes out to meet the first ray of the sun;
one must pluck it at that very moment and after inhaling its
perfume to one's heart's content cast it away on the chance that
someone will pick it up. I sense in myself that insatiable avidity
that devours everything in its path; and I regard the sufferings
and joys of others merely in relation to myself, as food to
sustain my spiritual strength. Passions no longer are capable of
robbing me of my sanity, my ambition has been crushed by
circumstances, but it has manifested itself in new form, for
ambition is nothing but greed for power, and my greatest
pleasure I derive from subordinating everything around me to
my will. Is it not both the first token of power and its supreme
triumph to inspire in others the emotions of love, devotion and
fear? Is it not the sweetest fare for our vanity to be the cause of
pain or joy for someone without the least claim thereto? And
what is happiness? Pride gratified. Could I consider myself
better and more powerful than anyone else in the world, I
should be happy; were everybody to love me, I should find in
myself unending well-springs of love. Evil begets evil; the first
pain leads to a realization of how great is the pleasure of
tormenting another; the conception of evil cannot take root in
the mind of man without his desiring to apply it in practice.
Someone has said that ideas are organic entities: their very
birth imparts them form, and this form is action. He in whose
brain most ideas are born is more active than others, and
because of this a genius shackled to an office desk must either
die or lose his mind, just as a man of powerful physique who
leads a sedentary and chaste life dies of apoplectic stroke.
Passions are nothing more than ideas at the first stage of
their development; they belong to the heart's youth, and he is
foolish who 'thinks they will stir him all his life. Many a placid
river begins in roaring waterfalls, but not a single stream leaps
and froths all the way to the sea. Frequently this placidity is a
symptom of great though latent force. The fullness and depth of
emotions and thought precludes furious impulses, for the soul
in its sufferings or rejoicings is fully alive to what is taking
place and conscious that so it must be; it knows that were there
no tempests the constant heat of the sun would shrivel it; it is
imbued with its own life, fostering and chastising itself as a
mother her favourite child. Only in this state of supreme selfcognition can a man appreciate the divine judgment. Reading
over this page I notice that I have digressed far from my
subject. But what of it? For I am writing this journal for myself
and hence anything I jot down will in time become a precious
memory to me.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Grushnitsky came and flung himself on my neck—he had
received his commission. We had some champagne. Doctor
Werner came in immediately after.
"I don't offer you my felicitations," he said to Grushnitsky.
"Why?"
"Because the soldier's greatcoat suits you very well and you
will have to admit that an infantry officer's uniform tailored
here at the spa will not add anything of interest to you. . . . You
see, so far you have been an exception, whereas now you will
be quite commonplace."
"Say what you will, doctor, you cannot prevent me from
rejoicing. He does not know," Grushnitsky whispered in my
ear, "what hopes I attach to these epaulettes. 0 epaulettes,
epaulettes! Your stars are little guiding stars. . . . No! I am
perfectly happy now."
"Are you coming with us for a walk to the chasm?" I asked
him.
"Oh no! I wouldn't show myself to the Princess for anything
until my new uniform is ready."
"Shall I tell her about your good fortune?"
"Please don't, I want it to be a surprise."
"Tell me though, how are you getting along with her?"
He was embarrassed and pondered a while. He would have
liked to brag about it and lie, but his conscience forbade him,
and at the same time he was ashamed to confess the truth.
"Do you think she loves you?"
"Does she love me? For goodness sake, Pechorin, what
ideas you have! How can you expect it so soon? And even if
she did, a respectable woman would not say so. . . . "
"Good! You probably believe that a respectable man too
must conceal his passion."
"Ah, my good fellow, there is a proper way to do
everything. Many things are not said but guessed. . . . "
"True enough. . . . Only the love we read in a woman's
eyes is non-commital whereas words. . . . Take care,
Grushnitsky, she is deceiving you. . . . "
"She?" he replied, raising his eyes to the sky and smiling
complacently. "I pity you, Pechorin!"
He left.
In the evening a large company set out on foot for the
chasm.
The local savants are of the opinion that this chasm is
nothing but an extinct crater. It is located on the slope of
Mashuk within a verst of the town. It is approached by a
narrow path winding through the brush and crags. As we
climbed the mountainside I offered my arm to the Princess,
who did not relinquish it throughout the entire walk.
Our conversation started with scandal; I began to go
through our acquaintances both present and absent, first
describing their ridiculous aspects, then their bad traits. My
gall was up and after starting off in jest I finished in deadly
earnest. At first she was amused, then alarmed.
"You are a dangerous man!" she told me. "I would rather
risk a murderer's knife in the forest than be flayed by your
tongue. I beg of you quite earnestly—if you should ever take it
into your mind to speak ill of me, take a knife instead and kill
me. I believe you would not find it too difficult to do."
"Do I look like a murderer?"
"You are worse. . . . "
I thought for a moment and then said, assuming a deeply
touched mien:
"Yes, such has been my lot since childhood. Everyone read
signs of non-existent evil traits in my features. But since they
were expected to be there, they did make their appearance.
Because I was reserved, they said I was sly, so I grew reticent. I
was keenly aware of good and evil, but instead of being
fondled I was insulted and so I became spiteful. I was sulky
while other children were merry and talkative, but though I felt
superior to them I was considered inferior. So I grew envious. I
was ready to love the whole world, but no one understood me,
and I learned to hate. My cheerless youth passed in conflict
with myself and society, and fearing ridicule I buried my finest
feelings deep in my heart, and there they died. I spoke the
truth, but nobody believed me, so I began to practice duplicity.
Having come to know society and its mainsprings, I became
versed in the art of living and saw how others were happy
without that proficiency, enjoying gratuitously the boons I had
so painfully striven for. It was then that despair was born in my
breast — not the despair that is cured with a pistol, but a cold,
impotent desperation concealed under a polite exterior and a
good-natured smile. I became a moral cripple; I had lost one
half of my soul, for it had shrivelled, dried up and died and I
had cut it off and cast it away, while the other half stirred and
lived, adapted to serve every comer. No one noticed this
because no one suspected there had been another half; now,
however, you awakened memories of it in me, and what I have
just done is to read its epitaph to you. Many regard all epitaphs
ridiculous, but I do not, particularly when I remember what
rests beneath them. Of course, I am not asking you to share my
opinion; if what I have said seems funny to you, please laugh,
though I warn you that it will not annoy me in the slightest."
At that moment our eyes met, and I saw that hers swam
with tears. Her arm resting on mine trembled, her cheeks were
flaming. She was sorry for me! Compassion—that emotion
which all women so easily yield to— had sunk its talons into
her inexperienced heart. Throughout the walk she was absentminded and flirted with no one—and that is a great omen
indeed!
We reached the chasm. The other ladies left their escorts,
but she did not release my arm. The witticisms of the local
dandies did not amuse her; the abruptness of the bluff on the
brink of which she stood "did not alarm her, though the other
young ladies squealed and closed their eyes.
On the way back I did not resume the sad conversation, but
to my idle questions and jests she gave only brief and
distracted answers.
"Have you ever been in love?" I finally asked her.
She looked at me intently, shook her head and again was
lost in thought. It was evident that she wanted to say something
but did not know where to begin. Her breast heaved. . . .
Indeed, a muslin sleeve affords but slight protection, and an
electric tremor ran from my arm to hers; most passions begin
thus, and we frequently deceive ourselves when we think that a
woman loves us for our physical or moral qualities; true, they
prepare the ground, dispose her heart to receive the sacred
flame, but nevertheless it is the first contact that decides the
issue.
"I have been very amiable today, have I not?" the Princess
said with a forced smile when we returned from our walk.
We parted.
She is displeased with herself; she accuses herself of being
cool. Ah, this is the first and most important triumph!
Tomorrow she will want to reward me. I know it all by rote—
and that is what makes it all so boring.
June 12
I have just seen Vera. She nagged me to death with
jealousy. I believe the Princess has chosen to confide her
secrets of the heart to Vera. An appropriate choice, indeed!
"I can guess what it all will lead to," Vera said to me. "It
would be better if you told me frankly now that you love her."
"But supposing I do not love her?"
"Then why pursue her, disturb her and stir her imagination?
Oh, I know you too well! If you want me to believe you, go to
Kislovodsk a week from now. We shall move there the day
after tomorrow. Princess Ligovskaya is remaining here a little
longer. Rent the apartment next door to ours; we shall stay in
the large house near the fountain, on the mezzanine floor.
Princess Ligovskaya will occupy the floor below, and next door
there is another house belonging to the same owner which has
not been taken yet. . . . Will you come?"
I promised, and the very same day sent a man to rent the
apartments.
Grushnitsky dropped in at six in the evening and announced
that his uniform would be ready the next day, just in time for
the ball.
"At last I shall dance with her all evening. . . . And talk to
my heart's content," he added.
"When is the ball?"
"Tomorrow. Didn't you know? It's quite a gala event, and
the local authorities are sponsoring it."
"Let's go out on the boulevard."
"Goodness no, not in this hideous greatcoat. . . . "
"What? Do you mean to say you don't like it any more?"
I went out alone, and, encountering Princess Mary asked
her for the mazurka. She looked surprised and pleased.
"I thought you danced only when necessary, like the last
time," she said, smiling very prettily.
She seemed to be totally unaware of Grushnitsky's absence.
"You will have a pleasant surprise tomorrow," I said to her.
"What is it?"
"It's a secret. . . . You will see for yourself at the ball."
I wound up the evening at Princess Ligovskaya's. There
were no guests besides Vera and a very amusing old man. I was
in good form and improvised all kinds of fantastic stories.
Princess Mary sat opposite me listening to my chatter with an
attention so great, intense and even tender that I felt a pang of
remorse. What had become of her vivacity, her coquetry, her
caprices, her haughty air, her contemptuous smile and absent
gaze?
Vera noticed it all and a deep sadness was reflected on her
wan face; she sat in the shadows at the window sunk in a broad
arm-chair. I was sorry for her. . . .
Then I related the whole dramatic story of our friendship
and love, naturally using fictitious names.
So vividly did I describe my tender feelings, anxieties and
raptures, and portrayed her actions and character in so
favourable a light that she could not but forgive me my
flirtation with the Princess.
She got up, moved to a seat closer to us and recovered her
spirits ... and only at two o'clock in the morning did we
recollect that physician's orders were to retire at eleven.
June 13
Half an hour before the ball Grushnitsky came to my
apartment in the full splendour of an infantry officer's uniform.
A bronze chain on which a double lorgnette dangled was
attached to his third button; he wore epaulettes of incredible
size which curled up like Cupid's wings; his boots squeaked; in
his left hand he carried a pair of brown kid gloves and his cap,
while with his right he kept twirling his frizzled forelock into
tiny curls. Complacency tinged with a certain hesitancy was
written on his face. His festive appearance and his proud
carriage would have made me roar with laughter had that been
in keeping with my intentions.
He threw his cap and gloves on the table and began to pull
at his coat-tails and preen himself in front of the mirror. An
enormous black kerchief twisted into a high stiffener for his
cravat, with bristles that supported his chin, showed a half an
inch above the collar; he thought that too little and pulled it up
to his ears. The exertion made his face grow purple, for the
collar of the uniform coat was very tight and uncomfortable.
"They say you have been hard after my Princess these
days," he said rather nonchalantly, without looking at me.
"It's not for the likes of us to drink tea!" replied I, repeating
a favourite saying by one of the cleverest rakes of the past once
sung by Pushkin.
"Say, does this thing fit me well? Confound the Jew! It's
tight under the armpits. Have you any perfume?"
"For goodness sake, what more do you want? You already
reek of rose pomade."
"Never mind. Let's have some. . . . "
He poured half a phial on his cravat, handkerchief and
sleeves.
"Going to dance?" he asked.
"I don't think so."
"I am afraid the Princess and I will have to start the
mazurka, and I scarcely know a single figure. . . . "
"Did you ask her for the mazurka?"
"No, not yet. . . . "
"Take care no one anticipates you. . . . "
"You're right, by gad!" he said, slapping his forehead.
"Good-bye, I'll go and wait for her at the entrance." He seized
his cap and ran off.
Half an hour later I too set out. The streets were dark and
deserted. Around the club rooms or inn—whichever you want
to call it—the crowds were gathering. The windows were
lighted up, and the evening wind wafted to me the strains of the
regimental band. I walked slowly, steeped in melancholy. Can
it be, thought I, that my sole mission on earth is to destroy the
hopes of others? Ever since I began to live and act, fate has
somehow associated me with the denouement of other people's
tragedies, as if without me no one could either die or give way
to despair! I have been the inevitable fifth-act character,
involuntarily playing the detestable role of the hangman or the
traitor. What has been fate's object in all this? Has it destined
me to be the author of middle-class tragedies and family
romances —or a purveyor of tales for, say, the Reader's
Library? Who knows? Are there not many who begin life by
aspiring to end it like Alexander the Great, or Lord Byron, and
yet remain petty civil servants all their lives?
On entering the hall I mingled with the crowd of men and
began making observations. Grushnitsky was standing beside
the Princess and talking with great ardour; she was listening to
him absent-mindedly, looking around and pressing her fan to
her lips; her countenance expressed impatience and her eyes
searched for someone. I quietly slipped behind them so as to
overhear the conversation.
"You are tormenting me, Princess," Grushnitsky said. "You
have changed terribly since I saw you last."
"You too have changed," she replied, throwing him a swift
look whose veiled scorn was lost on him.
"I? Changed? Never! You know that is impossible!
Whoever has seen you once will carry your divine image with
him to the grave. . . . "
"Stop. . . . "
"Why will you not listen now to what you so recently and
so often lent a favourable ear?"
"Because I do not like repetition," she replied, laughing.
"0, I have been bitterly mistaken! I thought, fool that I am,
that at least these epaulettes would give me the right to hope. . .
. Yes, it would have been better to spend the rest of my life in
that despicable greatcoat of a soldier to which I perhaps owe
your attention."
"Really, the greatcoat becomes you far better. . . . "
At that moment I came up and bowed to the Princess; she
blushed slightly, saying hurriedly:
"Don't you think, M'sieu Pechorin, that the grey greatcoat
suits M'sieu Grushnitsky much better?"
"I do not agree with you," replied I. "He looks even
younger in this uniform."
Grushnitsky could not stand the thrust, for like all boys he
lays claim to being a man of years. He thinks that the deep
traces of passions on his face can pass for the stamp of years.
He threw a furious look at me, stamped his foot and strode
away.
"You must admit," said I to the Princess, "that although he
has always been very ridiculous he still struck you as
interesting a short while ago . . . in his grey greatcoat."
She dropped her eyes and said nothing.
Grushnitsky pursued the Princess the whole evening,
dancing either with her or vis-a-vis; he devoured her with his
eyes, sighed and wearied her with his supplications and
reproaches. By the end of the third quadrille she already hated
him.
"I did not expect this of you," he said, coming up to me and
taking me by the arm.
"What are you talking about?"
"Are you going to dance the mazurka with her?" he asked
me in a solemn tone. "She admitted as much to me. . . . "
"Well, what of it? Is it a secret?"
"Of course. . . . I should have expected it from that hussy,
that flirt. . . . Never mind, I'll take my revenge!"
"Blame your greatcoat or your epaulettes, but why accuse
her? Is it her fault that she no longer likes you?"
"Why did she give me reason to hope?"
"Why did you hope? To want something and to strive for it
is something I can understand, but whoever hopes?"
"You have won the bet, but not entirely," he said, with a
sneer.
The mazurka began. Grushnitsky invited none but the
Princess, other cavaliers chose her every minute; it was
obviously a conspiracy against me— but that was all for the
better. She wanted to talk with me; she was prevented from
doing so—good! She would want to all the more.
I pressed her hand once or twice; the second time she pulled
her hand away without a word.
"I shall sleep badly tonight," she said to me when the
mazurka was over.
"Grushnitsky is to blame for that."
"Oh no!" And her face grew so pensive, so sad, that I
promised myself I would kiss her hand that night.
Everybody began to disperse. Having helped the Princess
into her carriage. I quickly pressed her little hand to my lips. It
was dark and no one could see.
I returned to the hall highly pleased with myself.
The young gallants were having supper around a large
table, Grushnitsky among them. When I entered they all fell
silent; they must have been talking about me. Ever since the
previous ball many of them, the captain of dragoons in
particular, have had a bone to pick with me, and now it seems
that a hostile band is being organized against me under
Grushnitsky's command. He wears such a cocky, bravura air.
I am very glad of it, for I love enemies, though not in the
Christian way. They amuse me and quicken my pulse. To be
always on one's guard, to catch every look and the significance
of every word, to guess intentions, foil conspiracies, pretend to
be deceived and then to overthrow with one blow the whole
vast edifice of artifices and designs raised with so much effort
— that is what I call life.
Throughout the meal Grushnitsky spoke in whispers and
exchanged winks with the captain of dragoons.
June 14
This morning Vera left for Kislovodsk with her husband.
Their carriage passed me as I was on my way to Princess
Ligovskaya's. She nodded to me; there was a reproach in her
eyes.
Who is to blame, after all? Why does she not want to give
me an opportunity to see her alone? Love, like fire, dies out
without fuel. Perhaps jealousy will succeed where my
pleadings have failed.
I stayed a whole hour at the Princess'. Mary did not come
down—she was indisposed. In the evening she did not appear
on the boulevard. The newly-formed gang had armed itself
with lorgnettes and looked formidable indeed. I am glad that
the Princess was ill, for they would have affronted her in
someway. Grushnitsky's hair was dishevelled and he looked
desperate; he actually seems to be embittered, his vanity
especially has been wounded. But some people are really
amusing even when desperate!
On returning home I felt a vague longing. I had not seen
her! She was ill! Have I actually fallen in love? What
nonsense!
June 15
At eleven o'clock in the morning, at which hour Princess
Ligovskaya usually sweats it out at the Yermolov baths, I
walked past her house. Princess Mary was sitting at the
window lost in thought; on seeing me, she jumped to her feet.
I walked into the anteroom; there was no one around and
taking advantage of the freedom of the local custom, I went
straight to the drawing-room without being announced.
A dull pallor had spread over the Princess' charming
features. She stood by the piano, leaning with one arm on the
back of a chair; the arm trembled slightly. Quietly I walked up
to her and said:
"Are you angry with me?"
She raised her eyes to me with a deep, languorous look and
shook her head; her lips wanted to say something, but could
not; her eyes filled with tears; she sank into a chair and covered
her face with her hands.
"What is the matter?" I said, taking her hand.
"You do not respect me! Oh, leave me alone!"
I stepped back a few paces. She stiffened in the chair and
her eyes flashed. . . .
I paused, my hand on the door knob, and said:
"I beg your pardon, Princess! I acted rashly ... it will not
happen again, I shall see to it. Why should you know what has
been going on in my heart? You shall never know it, which is
all the better for you. Farewell."
As I went out I thought I heard her sobbing.
Until evening I wandered about the environs of Mashuk,
tired myself out thoroughly and on returning home flung
myself on the bed in utter exhaustion.
Werner dropped in to see me.
"Is it true," he asked, "that you intend to marry Princess
Ligovskaya?"
"Why do you ask?"
"The whole town is talking about it. AH my patients can
think of nothing else but this important news, and these
watering place crowds know everything!"
"This is Grushnitsky's little joke!" thought I.
"To prove to you, doctor, how unfounded these rumours
are, I shall tell you in confidence that I am going to Kislovodsk
tomorrow."
"And Princess Mary as well?"
"No, she will remain here another week."
"So you do not intend to marry?"
"Doctor, doctor! Look at me: do I look like a bridegroom or
anything of the kind?"
"I am not saying you do. . . . But, you know, it sometimes
happens," he added, smiling slyly, "that a man of honour is
obliged to get married, and that there are fond mamas who at
least do not prevent such eventualities from arising. . . . So as
a friend, I advise you to be more cautious. The air is highly
dangerous here at the waters. How many splendid young men
worthy of a better fate have I seen leave here bound straight for
the altar. Believe it or not, they wanted to marry me off, too. It
was the doing of one provincial mama with a very pale
daughter. I had the misfortune to tell her that the girl would
regain her colour after the nuptials; whereupon with tears of
gratitude in her eyes she offered me her daughter's hand and all
her property—fifty souls, I believe it was. I told her, however,
that I was quite unfit for matrimony."
Werner left fully confident that he had given me a timely
warning.
I could tell by what he had said that diverse malicious
rumours had been spread all over town about the Princess and
myself: Grushnitsky will have to pay for this!
June 18
It is three days since I arrived in Kislovodsk. I see Vera
every day at the spring or on the promenade. When I wake up
in the morning I sit at the window and direct a lorgnette at her
balcony. Having dressed long before, she waits for the signal
agreed upon, and we meet as if by accident in the garden which
slopes down to the spring from our houses. The invigorating
mountain air has returned colour to her face and given her
strength. It is not for nothing that Narzan is called the spring of
giants. The local inhabitants claim that the air in Kislovodsk is
conducive to love and that all the love affairs that ever began at
the foot of Mashuk have invariably reached their denouement
here. And indeed, everything here breathes of solitude;
everything is mysterious—the dense shadows of the avenues of
lime-trees hanging over the torrent, which, falling noisily and
frothily from flag to flag, cleaves its way through the green
mountains, and the gorges, full of gloom and silence, that
branch out from here in all directions, and the freshness of the
fragrant air laden with the aroma of the tall southern grasses
and the white acacia, and the incessant deliriously drowsy
babble of the cool brooks which, mingling at the end of the
valley, rush onward to hurl their waters into the Podkumok. On
this side the gorge is wider and spreads out into a green
depression, and through it meanders a dusty road. Each time I
look at it, I seem to see a carriage approaching and a pretty
rosy-cheeked face looking out of its window. Many a carriage
has already rolled along that road—but there still is no sign of
that particular one. The settlement beyond the fort is now
densely populated; from the restaurant built on a hill a few
paces from my apartment lights have begun to glimmer in the
evenings through the double row of poplars, and the noise and
the clinking of glasses can be heard until late at night.
Nowhere is there so much Kakhetian wine and mineral
water quaffed as here.
To jumble up such various kinds of fun
There's many take delight: for me, I am not one.
Grushnitsky and his gang carouse daily in the saloon. He
hardly ever greets me now.
He arrived only yesterday, but he has already managed to
pick a quarrel with three old men who wanted to take their
baths before him. Bad luck is decidedly developing a bellicose
spirit in him.
June 22
At last they arrived. I was sitting at the window when I
heard their carriage drive up, and my heart bounded. What does
it mean? Could I be in love? So senselessly am I constituted
that it might indeed be expected of me.
I had dinner with them. Princess Ligovskaya eyed me very
tenderly and did not leave her daughter's side—a bad sign that!
But Vera is jealous of Princess Mary; I have managed to
achieve that felicitous state after all! What would not a woman
do to hurt a rival! I recall a woman who loved me simply
because I was in love with another. Nothing is more
paradoxical than the feminine mind: it is hard to convince
women of anything, they must be brought to a point where they
will convince themselves. The method of adducing the
evidence with which they annihilate their prejudices is highly
original, and to come to know their dialectics one must
overthrow in one's mind all the academic rules of logic. For
example, the ordinary method is this:
This man loves me; but I am married; hence, I must not
love him.
The feminine method is this:
I must not love him, because I am married; but he loves me,
and hence. . . .
Here follows a pregnant pause, for reason is now dumb, and
all the talking is mainly done by the tongue, eyes, and
eventually the heart, if there is one.
What if these notes fall into a woman's hands some day?
"Libel!" she will cry indignantly.
Ever since poets began to write and women to read them
(for which they must be heartily thanked), the latter have been
called angels so often that in the simplicity of their hearts they
have actually come to believe in this compliment, forgetting
that for money the very same poets exalted Nero as a demigod.
It might appear unseemly that I should speak of them with
such malice —I, who have never loved anything else under the
sun, I, who have always been ready to sacrifice my peace of
mind, ambition and life for their sake. . . . Yet it is not in a fit
of annoyance or injured vanity that I endeavour to draw aside
that magic veil which only the accustomed eye can penetrate.
No, all that I say about them is only the result of
The mind's reflections coldly noted.
The bitter insights of the heart.
Women should wish all men to know them as well as I do,
for I have loved them a hundred times more since I overcame
my fear of them and discovered their petty frailties.
Incidentally, Werner the other day compared women with
the enchanted forest described by Tasso in his "Jerusalem
Delivered."
"You have but to approach it," he said, "to be assaulted
from all sides by ungodly terrors: duty, pride, respectability,
public opinion, ridicule, contempt. . . . You must not heed
them, but go straight on; little by little the monsters vanish and
before you opens a quiet, sunny glade with green myrtle
blooming in its midst. But woe to you if your heart quails when
you take those first steps and you turn back!"
June 24
This evening was replete with events. Some three versts out
of Kislovodsk, in the gorge where the Podkumok flows, there
is a crag called The Ring, forming a natural gateway that
towers above a high hill; through it the setting sun casts its last
fiery glance at the world. A large cavalcade set out to watch the
sunset through the rocky window. To tell the truth, though,
none of the people who came along thought of the sunset. I
rode next to Princess Mary. On the way back we had to ford the
Podkumok. Even the smallest mountain streams are dangerous
chiefly because their bottoms are a perfect kaleidoscope,
changing day after day under the action of the current; where
there was a rock yesterday there may be a pit today. I took the
Princess' horse by the bridle and led it to the water, which did
not rise above the knees; we started crossing slowly at an angle
against the current. It is a well-known fact that in crossing
rapids one should not look at the water because it makes you
dizzy. I forgot to warn Princess Mary of this.
We were already in midstream, where the current is the
swiftest, when she suddenly began to sway in the saddle. "I feel
faint!" she gasped. Quickly I bent over toward her and put my
arm around her supple waist.
"Look up!" I whispered to her. "Don't be afraid, it's quite all
right; I am with you."
She felt better and wanted to free herself from my arm, but
I tightened my embrace about her soft slender waist; my cheek
almost touched hers; I could feel its fiery glow.
"What are you doing? My God!"
I paid no heed to her quivering confusion, and my lips
touched her soft cheek; she started, but said nothing. We were
riding behind the others; no one saw us. When we clambered
ashore, everyone set off at a trot. The Princess, however, reined
in her horse, and I remained with her; it was obvious that she
was worried by my silence, but I swore to myself not to say a
word—out of sheer curiosity. I wanted to see how she would
extricate herself from the embarrassing situation.
"Either you despise me or you love me very much," she
said at last in a voice that shook with tears. "Perhaps you wish
to mock at me, play on my feelings, and then leave me. . . .
That would be so vile, so low, that the very thought. . . . Oh
no! Surely," she added with an air of tender trustfulness, "there
is nothing in me that would preclude respect, is there? Your
presumptuous conduct. . . . I must, I must forgive you because
I suffered it. . . . Answer me, speak to me, I want to hear your
voice!" There was so much womanly impetuosity in her last
words that I could not suppress a smile; luckily, it was growing
dark. I did not reply.
"You have nothing to say?" she continued. "Perhaps you
wish me to be the first to say that I love you?"
I was silent.
"Do you want me to do that?" she went on, swiftly turning
toward me. There was something awe-inspiring in the
earnestness of her eyes and voice.
"Why should I?" I replied, shrugging my shoulders.
She struck her horse with her riding crop and set off at full
gallop along the narrow, dangerous road; it all happened so
quickly that I was hardly able to overtake her, and did so only
when she had already joined the rest of the company. All the
way home she talked and laughed incessantly. There was a
feverishness in her movements; and not once did she look at
me. Everybody noticed this unusual gaiety. Princess
Ligovskaya rejoiced inwardly as she watched her daughter; but
her daughter was merely suffering a fit of nerves and would
spend a sleepless night weeping. The very thought gives me
infinite pleasure; there are moments when I understand the
Vampire. . . . And yet I have the reputation of being a good
fellow and try to live up to it!
Having dismounted, the ladies went in to Princess
Ligovskaya's. I was agitated and galloped into the hills to
dispel the thoughts that crowded into my mind. The dewy
evening breathed a delicious coolness. The moon was rising
from behind the darkly looming mountain pinnacles. Every
step my unshod horse took echoed dully in the silence of the
gorges. I watered my horse at a waterfall, eagerly drank in the
invigorating air of the southern night, and retraced my steps. I
rode through the village. Lights were going out in the
windows; sentries on the ramparts of the fort and Cossack
pickets on the outposts hallooed to each other on a sustained
note.
I noticed that one of the houses in the village which had
been built on the brink of a gully was unusually brightly lit,
and every now and then I could hear a babble of voices and
shouting which betokened an armymen's carousal. I
dismounted and crept up to the window; a loose shutter made it
possible for me to see the revellers and overhear what they
were saying. They were talking about me.
The captain of dragoons, flushed with wine, pounded the
table with his fist to command attention.
"Gentlemen!" he said. "This won't do at all. Pechorin must
be taught a lesson. These Petersburg whippersnappers get
uppish until they're rapped on the knuckles! Just because he
always wears clean gloves and shiny boots he thinks he's the
only society man around."
"And that supercilious smile of his! Yet I'm certain he's a
coward— yes, a coward!"
"I believe so too," said Grushnitsky. "He turns everything
into a joke. Once I told him off in such terms that another man
would have cut me down on the spot, but Pechorin just laughed
it off. I, of course, didn't challenge him, because it was up to
him to do so; besides I did not want to bother. . . . "
"Grushnitsky is wild because he stole a march on him with
the Princess," said someone.
"What nonsense! True, I did run after the Princess a bit, but
I gave it up soon enough because I have no desire to marry and
I do not believe in compromising a girl."
"Yes, I assure you he is a coward of the first water, Pechorin
I mean, not Grushnitsky. Grushnitsky is a fine chap and a good
friend of mine to boot!" said the captain of dragoons.
"Gentlemen! Does anyone here want to stand up for him? No
one? All the better! Do you wish to test his courage? It will be
amusing. . . . "
"We do. But how?"
"Now listen to me: since Grushnitsky's grievance is the
biggest, his shall be the leading role. He will take exception to
some trifle and challenge Pechorin to a duel. . . . Wait, this is
the point. . . . He will challenge Pechorin—so far so good!
Everything, the challenge, the preparations and the conditions
will be made in as solemn and awe-inspiring a fashion as
possible —I shall take care of that, for I'll be your second, my
poor friend! Very well! Now this is the trick: we will not load
the pistols. I give you my word Pechorin will show the white
feather—six paces from one another I'll place them, damn it!
Are you agreeable, gentlemen?"
"Grand idea, splendid! What a lark!" came from all sides.
"And you, Grushnitsky?"
I awaited Grushnitsky's reply with trepidation; a cold fury
gripped me at the thought that mere chance had saved me from
being made the butt of these fools' jest. Had Grushnitsky not
agreed to it, I would have flung myself on his neck. After a
brief silence, however, he rose from his seat, extended his hand
to the captain and said very pompously: "Very well, I agree."
The elation of the whole honourable company defies
description.
I returned home a prey to two conflicting emotions. One
was sadness. Why do they all hate me? I thought. Why? Had I
offended anybody? No. Can it be that I am one of those whose
mere appearance excites ill will? And I felt a venomous wrath
gradually take possession of me. Take care, Mr. Grushnitsky, I
said to myself as I paced up and down the room, you cannot
trifle thus with me. You might have to pay dearly for the
approbation of your stupid comrades. I am not a toy for you to
play with! . . .
I lay awake all night. In the morning I looked as yellow as
an orange.
Early in the day I met Princess Mary at the spring.
"Are you ill?" she asked, looking at me intently.
"I did not sleep all night."
"Neither did I. . . . I blamed you ... unjustly perhaps? But
if you would only explain I could forgive you everything."
"Everything?"
"Yes, everything. . . . Only you must tell the truth ... be
quick. . . . You see, I have gone over it again and again, trying
to find some explanation that would justify your conduct.
Perhaps you fear opposition on the part of my relatives? There
is nothing to worry about that; when they hear of it ... (her
voice trembled) I shall persuade them. Or, perhaps, it is your
own position . . . but I want you to know that I am capable of
sacrificing everything for the sake of the man I love. . . . Oh,
answer me quickly—have pity on me. . . . Tell me, you don't
despise me, do you?"
She seized my hand.
Princess Ligovskaya was walking ahead of us with Vera's
husband and saw nothing; but we could have been observed by
the patients who were strolling about, and they are the most
inquisitive of all inquisitive gossips, so I quickly disengaged
my hand from her passionate clasp.
"I shall tell you the whole truth," I said, "without trying to
justify myself or to explain my actions. I do not love you."
Her lips paled slightly.
"Leave me," she said in a barely audible voice.
I shrugged my shoulders, turned, and walked away.
June 25
Sometimes I despise myself; is that why I despise others
too? I am no longer capable of noble impulses; I am afraid of
appearing ridiculous to myself. Anyone else would have
offered the Princess son coeur et sa fortune but for me the word
marriage has an odd spell: no matter how passionately I might
love a woman it is farewell to love if she as much as hints at
my marrying her. My heart turns to stone, and nothing can
warm it again. I would make any sacrifice but this; twenty
times I can stake my life, even my honour, but my freedom I
shall never sell. Why do I prize it so much? What do I find in
it? What am I aiming at? What have I to expect from the
future? Nothing, absolutely nothing. It is some innate fear, an
inexplicable foreboding. . . . After all, some people have an
unreasoning fear of spiders, cockroaches, mice. . . . Shall I
confess? When I was still a child, some old woman told my
fortune for my mother, predicting that I would die through a
wicked wife. It made a deep impression on me at the time, and
an insuperable abhorrence for marriage grew within me. And
yet something tells me that her prophecy will come true; but at
least I shall do my best to put off its fulfilment as long as
possible.
June 26
Apfelbaum, the conjurer, arrived here yesterday. A long
poster appeared on the restaurant doors informing the worthy
public that the above-named amazing magician, acrobat,
chemist and optician would have the honour to present a
magnificent spectacle this day at eight o'clock in the evening in
the hall of the Nobles' Club (otherwise the restaurant);
admission two rubles and a half.
Everybody intends to go and see the amazing conjurer;
even Princess Ligovskaya has taken a ticket for herself,
although her daughter is ill.
As I was walking past Vera's windows today after dinner—
she was sitting on the balcony alone—a note fell at my feet:
"Come tonight at ten o'clock in the evening by the main
staircase; my husband has gone to Pyatigorsk and will not be
back until tomorrow morning. My menservants and
chambermaids will not be in: I gave them all, as well as the
Princess' servants, tickets to the show. I shall wait for you;
come without fail."
"Aha!" thought I. "At last I am having my way."
At eight o'clock I went to see the conjurer. It was nearly
nine when the audience had assembled and the performance
began. In the back rows I recognized the lackeys and
chambermaids of both Vera and the Princess. They were all
there. Grushnitsky was sitting in the first row with his
lorgnette. The conjurer turned to him each time he needed a
handkerchief, watch, ring, or the like.
Grushnitsky has not bowed to me for some time, and now
he eyed me rather insolently once or twice. He shall rue it
when the time comes to settle scores.
It was nearly ten when I rose and went out.
It was pitch black outside. Heavy, chill clouds lay on the
summits of the surrounding mountains, and only now and then
did the dying breeze rustle the tops of the poplars around the
restaurant. People were crowding at the windows. I went down
the hill and, after turning into the gate, quickened my pace.
Suddenly I felt that someone was following me. I stopped and
looked around. It was too dark to see anything, but for the sake
of caution I walked around the house as if merely out for a
stroll. As I passed Princess Mary's windows I again heard
footsteps behind me, and a man wrapped in a greatcoat ran past
me. This worried me; nevertheless I crept up to the porch and
hurried up the dark staircase. The door opened; a little hand
seized mine. . . .
"No one saw you?" Vera whispered, clinging to me.
"No!"
"Now do you believe that I love you! Oh, I have hesitated
so long, tormented myself so long . . . but I am as clay in your
hands."
Her heart pounded, and her hands were cold as ice. Then
followed reproaches and jealous recriminations—she
demanding a full confession, vowing she would meekly endure
my faithlessness, for her only desire was to see me happy. I did
not quite believe that but, nevertheless, reassured her with
vows, promises, and so on.
"So you are not going to marry Mary? You don't love her?
And she thinks... do you know she is madly in love with you,
the poor thing!..."
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
At about two o'clock in the morning I opened the window
and, knotting two shawls together, let myself down from the
upper balcony to the lower, holding on to a column as I did so.
A light was still burning in Princess Mary's room. Something
impelled me toward that window. The curtains were not drawn
tight and I was able to cast a curious glance into the interior of
the room. Mary was sitting on her bed, her hands crossed on
her knees; her abundant tresses had been gathered under a lace
night cap; a large scarlet shawl covered her white shoulders,
and her tiny feet were concealed in a pair of brightly coloured
Persian slippers. She sat motionless, her head sunk on her
breast; on a table before her lay an open book, but her fixed
gaze, full of inexpressible sadness, seemed to be skimming one
and the same page for the hundredth time while her thoughts
were far away. . . .
Just then someone moved behind a bush. I jumped down to
the lawn from the balcony. An invisible hand seized me by the
shoulder. "Aha!" said a gruff voice. "Got you! I'll teach you to
go prowling in princesses' rooms at night!"
"Hold him fast!" yelled another, leaping from behind the
corner. They were Grushnitsky and the captain of dragoons.
I struck the latter on the head with my fist, knocking him
down, and ran for the bushes. I knew all the paths in the garden
covering the slope opposite our houses.
"Thieves! Help!" they shouted; a shot was fired; the
glowing wad fell almost at my feet.
A minute later I was in my own room, undressed and in
bed. My man. servant had scarcely locked the door when
Grushnitsky and the captain began pounding on it.
"Pechorin! Are you asleep? Are you there?" the captain
shouted.
"I'm in bed," I replied testily.
"Get up! Thieves! The Cherkess!"
"I have a cold," I replied, "I'm afraid of aggravating it."
They went away. I should not have answered them; they
would have spent another hour searching for me in the garden.
In the meantime a fearful hue and cry was raised. A Cossack
galloped down from the fort Everything was agog; Cherkess
were being hunted for in every bush, but of course, none were
found. Many probably carried off the firm conviction however,
that had the garrison displayed greater courage and speed at
least a dozen or two marauders would have been left on the
spot.
June 27
The Cherkess night raid was the sole subject of
conversation at the spring this morning. Having imbibed the
prescribed number of glasses of Narzan and walked some ten
times up and down the long linden avenue, I met Vera's
husband, who had just returned from Pyatigorsk. He took my
arm and we went into the restaurant for breakfast. He was
exceedingly worried about his wife. "She had a terrible fright
last night!" he said. "A thing like this would have to happen
just when I was away!" We sat down for breakfast near the
door leading to the corner room, which was occupied by a
dozen gallants, Grushnitsky among them. And for the second
time Providence offered me an opportunity to overhear a
conversation that was to decide his fate. He did not see me, and
hence I could not conclude that he was talking deliberately for
my benefit; but that only enhanced his guilt in my eyes.
"Could it really have been the Cherkess?" said someone.
"Did anyone see them?"
"I'll tell you the whole truth," replied Grushnitsky, "only I
ask you not to give me away. This is what happened: last night
a man, whose name I shall not mention, came to me with the
story that he had seen someone sneaking into the Ligovsky
house at about ten at night. Let me remind you that Princess
Ligovskaya was here at the time, and Princess Mary at home.
So I set out with him to lay in wait for the lucky fellow under
her window."
I admit I was alarmed lest my companion, engrossed
though he was with his breakfast, should hear some rather
unpleasant things if Grushnitsky had guessed the truth. Blinded
by jealousy, however, the latter did not even suspect what had
happened.
"So you see," Grushnitsky continued, "we set off taking
along a gun loaded with a blank charge in order to give the
fellow a fright. Until two o'clock we waited in the garden.
Finally he appeared, the Lord knows from where, only it wasn't
through the window because it did not open—he probably
came through the glass door hidden behind a column—finally,
I say, we saw somebody climbing off the balcony. . . . What do
you think of the Princess, eh? I must admit these Moscow
ladies are beyond me! What can you believe in after this? We
tried to seize him, but he broke loose and scurried for the
bushes like a hare; that's when I shot at him."
A murmur of incredulity broke out around Grushnitsky.
"You do not believe me?" he continued. "I give you my
word of honour that this is the downright truth, and to prove it,
perhaps, I shall mention the name of the gentleman in
question."
"Who was it, who was it?" came from all sides.
"Pechorin," replied Grushnitsky.
At that moment he raised his eyes—to see me standing in
he doorway facing him; he flushed scarlet. I stepped up to him
and said very slowly and distinctly:
"I am very sorry that I entered after you had already given
your word of honour in confirmation of the most abominable
piece of slander. My presence might have saved you from that
added villainy."
Grushnitsky leapt to his feet, all ready to flare up.
"I beg of you," I continued in the same tone of voice, "I beg
of you to retract at once what you have said; you are very well
aware that it is a lie. I do not believe that the indifference of a
woman to your brilliant qualities deserves such severe
retaliation. Think it over well: if you persist in your opinion,
you forfeit your right to a reputation of a man of honour and
risk your life."
Grushnitsky stood before me, eyes downcast, in violent
agitation. But the struggle between conscience and vanity was
brief. The captain of dragoons, who was sitting next to him,
nudged him with his elbow; he started and quickly replied to
me without raising his eyes:
"My dear sir, when I say something I mean it, and am ready
to repeat it. . . . Your threats do not intimidate me and I will
stick at nothing."
"The last you have already proved," I replied coldly, and
taking the arm of the captain of dragoons, led him out of the
room.
"What do you wish with me?" asked the captain.
"You are a friend of Grushnitsky's and will probably be his
second?"
The captain bowed with much hauteur.
"You have guessed right," he replied. "Moreover, I am
obliged to be his second, for the insult you have offered him
concerns me too . . . I was with him last night," he added,
squaring his stooping shoulders.
"Ah, so it was you I hit so clumsily on the head?"
He went yellow, then blue; suppressed anger showed on his
face.
"I shall have the honour to send my second to you shortly,"
I added, bowing very politely and pretending to ignore his fury.
On the steps of the restaurant I met Vera's husband. He had
evidently been waiting for me.
He seized hold of my hand with something akin to rapture.
"Noble-minded young man!" he said with tears in his eyes.
"I heard everything. What a scoundrel! The ingrate! Just think
of admitting them into a respectable home after this! Thank
God I have no daughters! But she for whom you are risking
your life will reward you. You may be assured of my discretion
for the time being," he continued. "I was young once myself
and served in the army; I know one must not interfere in affairs
like this. Good-bye!"
Poor fellow! He is glad that he has no daughters. . . .
I went straight to Werner, whom I found at home, and told
him everything—my relations with Vera and the Princess and
the conversation I had overheard which apprised me of these
gentlemen's intentions to make a fool of me by having us shoot
it out with blank charges. Now, however, the affair had
overstepped the bounds of a joke; they probably had not
expected it to end like this.
The doctor agreed to act as my second. I gave him a few
instructions concerning the conditions of the duel; he was to
insist on the greatest secrecy, for though I am always ready to
risk my life, I am not disposed in the slightest to spoil my
future in this world for all time to come.
Afterwards I went home. An hour later the doctor returned
from his expedition.
"There indeed is a conspiracy against you," he said. "I
found the captain of dragoons and another gentleman whose
name I do not remember at Grushnitsky's. I stopped for a
moment in the hallway to take off my galoshes; inside there
was a terrific noise and argument going on. 'I will not agree on
any account!' Grushnitsky was saying. 'He insulted me
publicly; at that time it was an entirely different matter. . . . '
'Why should it concern you?' replied the captain. 'I am taking
everything upon myself. I have been a second in five duels and
know how these things are arranged. I have thought it out in
every detail. Only be so good as not to interfere with me. It will
do good to give him a fright. And why should you run a risk if
you can avoid it?' At that point I walked in. They immediately
fell silent. Our parleys lasted for quite a while, and finally we
came to the following arrangement: about five versts from here
there is a lonely gorge; they will go there tomorrow morning at
four o'clock, and we are to leave half an hour later. You will
fire at six paces—Grushnitsky insisted on that distance himself.
The dead man is to be credited to the Cherkess. Now I will tell
you what I suspect: they, the seconds, I mean, have apparently
amended the earlier scheme somewhat and want to put a bullet
only into Grushnitsky's pistol. It looks rather like murder, but
cunning is permitted in wartime, particularly in an Asiatic war.
I daresay though that Grushnitsky is slightly better than his
comrades. What do you think? Should we let them know that
we have guessed their stratagem?"
"Not for anything in the world, doctor! You can rest assured
I shall not give in to them."
"What do you intend to do?"
"That is my secret."
"Take care you do not fall into the trap. . . . Remember the
distance is only six paces!"
"Doctor, I shall expect you tomorrow at four. The horses
will be saddled. Good-bye!"
I sat at home until evening, locked up in my room. A
footman came with an invitation from Princess Ligovskaya, but
I said I was ill.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
It is two o'clock in the morning, but I cannot fall asleep. I
know I should rest, so that my hand should be steady
tomorrow. It will be hard to miss at six paces though. Ah, Mr.
Grushnitsky, your hoax will not succeed! We shall exchange
roles, and now it will be for me to look for signs of secret terror
on your pallid face. Why did you insist on these fatal six paces?
You think that I shall submissively offer you my brow as a
target ... but we shall draw lots! And then . . . then . . . but what
if fortune smiles on him? What if my star fails me at last? And
little wonder if it did; it has served me faithfully so long.
Ah, well! If I must die, I must! The world will lose little,
and I am weary enough of it all. I am like a man who yawns at
a ball and does not go home to sleep only because his carriage
has not come. But the carriage is here—good-bye!
I run through my past life in my mind and involuntarily ask
myself: Why have I lived? For what purpose was I born? I
daresay there was a purpose, and I daresay, fate had something
noble in store for me, for I am conscious of untapped powers
within me. . . . But I did not divine my predestination, I
allowed myself to be carried away by the temptation of vain
and ignoble passions; I emerged from their crucible hard and
cold like iron, but gone forever was the ardour of noble
aspirations—life's finest flower. How often since then have I
played the role of an axe in the hands of fate! Like that
instrument of punishment I have fallen upon the heads of the
condemned, often without malice, always without regret... My
love has never made anyone happy, for I have never sacrificed
anything for those I loved; I have loved only for myself, for my
own pleasure; I have striven only to satisfy a strange craving of
the heart, greedily absorbing their emotions, their tenderness,
their joys and sufferings—and have never been sated. I have
been like the starving man who falls into a stupor from sheer
exhaustion and dreams of luxurious viands and sparkling
wines; exultingly he gorges himself on these ephemeral gifts of
the imagination, and seems to feel better; but when he awakes
the vision is gone . . . and redoubled hunger and despair
remain!
Perhaps I shall die tomorrow, and there will not be a
creature left on earth who understands me fully. Some think of
me worse, others better, than I really am. Some will say: he
was a good fellow; others: he was a scoundrel. And both will
be wrong. Is it worth the trouble to live after this? And yet you
go on living—out of curiosity, in expectation of something
new. . . . How ludicrous and how vexatious!
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A month and a half has passed since I arrived at the fort of
N. Maxim Maximych has gone out hunting. . . . I am all alone.
I am sitting at the window; outside the grey clouds have
concealed the mountains to their very base; the sun looks like a
yellow blotch through the mist. It is cold; the wind is soughing
and rattling the shutters. . . . How wearisome it all is! I shall
resume writing my journal which has been interrupted by so
many queer events.
Reading over the last page, it strikes me as humorous. I
thought I would die, but that was out of the question, for I had
not drained my cup of misery to the dregs, and now I feel that I
still have long to live.
How clearly and sharply everything that has happened is
imprinted in my memory! Time has not obliterated a single line
or shade.
I recall that on the night preceding the duel I did not sleep a
wink. A mysterious disquietude seized me and I could not write
for long. For about an hour I paced the room; then I sat down
and opened a novel by Walter Scott that had lain on my table: it
was Old Mortality. At first I read with an effort, then, carried
away by the enchanting fiction, I was soon oblivious to
everything.
At last day broke. My nerves had grown calm. I examined
my face in the mirror: a dull pallor had spread over my features
which still showed traces of a racking sleepless night, but my
eyes, though encircled by dark shadows, shone proudly and
remorselessly. I was satisfied with myself.
Ordering the horses to be saddled, I dressed and hurried to
the baths. As I immersed myself in the cold Narzan water, I felt
my physical and spiritual strength returning. I left the baths as
refreshed and vigorous as if about to attend a ball. After this no
one can tell me that the soul is not dependent on the body!
On returning home I found the doctor there. He was
wearing grey riding breeches, a light caftan gathered in at the
waist and a Cherkess cap. I burst out laughing at the sight of
his slight frame beneath the enormous shaggy cap. His
countenance is anything but warlike, and this time he looked
more, dejected than usual.
"Why so sad, doctor?" I said to him. "Haven't you seen
people off to the next world a hundred times with the greatest
indifference? Imagine that I have a bilious fever, and that I
have equal chances of recovering or succumbing; both
eventualities are in the order of things; try to regard me as a
patient stricken with a disease you have not yet diagnosed—
that will stimulate your curiosity to the utmost. You may now
make some important physiological observations on me. . . .
Is not expectation of death by violence a real illness in itself?"
This thought impressed the doctor and his spirits rose.
We mounted. Werner clung to the reins with both hands and
we set off. In a flash we had galloped through the settlement
and past the fort and entered the gorge through which a road
wound its way. It was half overgrown with tall grass and
intersected at short intervals by noisy brooks which we had to
ford to the great despair of the doctor whose horse would halt
each time in the water.
I cannot remember a morning bluer or fresher. The sun had
barely peeped over the green summits and the merging of the
first warmth of its rays with the dying coolness of the night
brought a sweet languor to the senses. The exultant ray of the
young day had not yet penetrated into the gorge; now it gilded
only the tips of the crags that towered above us on both sides.
The dense foliage of the bushes growing in the deep crevices of
the cliffs showered a silvery rain upon us at the slightest breath
of wind.
I remember that at that moment I loved nature as never
before. With what curiosity did I gaze at each dew-drop that
trembled on the broad vine leaves, reflecting millions of
rainbow rays! How eagerly my eyes sought to pierce -the hazy
distance! There the path grew narrower and narrower, the crags
bluer and more awesome, seeming to merge at last into an
impregnable wall. We rode along in silence.
"Have you made your will?" Werner asked all of a sudden.
"No."
"What if you are killed?"
"The heirs will turn up themselves."
"Have you no friends you would wish to send your last
farewell?"
 I shook my head.
"Is there no woman in the world to whom you would want
to leave a remembrance?"
"Do you want me to lay bare my soul to you, doctor?" I
replied. "You see, I am past the years when people die with the
names of their beloved on their lips and bequeath a lock of
pomaded, or unpomaded, hair to a friend. When I think of
imminent and possible death, I think only of myself; some do
not even do that. Friends, who will forget me tomorrow, or,
worse still, who will weave God knows what fantastic yarns
about me, and women, who in the embrace of another will
laugh at me in order that he might not be jealous of the
departed—what do I care for them? From life's turmoil I have
drawn a few ideas, but no feeling. For a long time now I have
been living l»y my reason, not my heart. I weigh and analyze
my own emotions and actions with stern curiosity, but without
sympathy. There are two men in me; one lives in the full sense
of the word, the other reasons and passes judgment on the first.
The first will, perhaps, take leave of you and the world forever
an hour from now, and the second ... the second. . . . Look,
doctor, do you see the three dark figures on the cliff to the
right? I believe they are our adversaries."
We spurred our horses on.
Three horses were tethered in the bushes at the foot of the
cliff. We tethered ours there too and continued on foot up a
narrow path to a ledge where Grushnitsky was waiting for us
with the captain of dragoons and another second by the name
of Ivan Ignatych; his surname I had never heard.
"We have been waiting a long time for you," said the
captain of dragoons, with an ironical smile.
I pulled out my watch and showed it to him.
He apologized, saying that his watch was fast.
For several minutes there was an awkward silence. At last
the doctor broke it, turning to Grushnitsky:
"I believe," he said, "that having both shown your readiness
to fight and thereby duly discharged your debt of honour, you
might, gentlemen, come to an understanding and end this affair
amicably."
"I am ready to do so," said I.
The captain winked at Grushnitsky, who thinking that I was
showing the white feather assumed a haughty air, although his
face had been sickly grey until that moment. Now for the first
time since our arrival he looked at me; the glance was uneasy
and betrayed his inner conflict.
"Tell me your conditions," he said, "and you may rest
assured that I shall do all I can for you. . . . "
"These are my conditions: you will today publicly retract
your calumny and apologize to me. . . . "
"My dear sir, I am amazed that you dare suggest anything
of the kind. . . . "
"What else could I suggest?"
"We shall shoot it out."
I shrugged my shoulders.
"So be it; only remember that one of us is bound to be
killed."
"I hope it will be you."
"And I am quite certain of the contrary."
He started and flushed red, and then he forced a laugh.
The captain took him by the arm and led him aside; they
spoke in whispers at some length. I had arrived quite peaceably
disposed, but now these proceedings were getting on my
nerves.
The doctor came up to me.
"Look here," he said, obviously worried, "have you
forgotten about their conspiracy? I do not know how to load a
pistol, but if that is the case. . . . You are a queer man! Tell
them you are aware of their intentions, and they will not
dare. . . . Where's the sense of it? They will shoot you down
like a fowl. . . . "
"Please, doctor, do not alarm yourself, and wait a little. . . .
I shall handle it so that they will not have any advantage. Let
them whisper. . . . "
"Gentlemen, this is becoming tiresome!" I said to them in a
loud voice. "If we are to fight, let us do so; you had time
yesterday to talk it over. . . . "
"We are ready," replied the captain. "Take your places,
gentlemen! Doctor, will you measure off six paces?"
"Take your places!" repeated Ivan Ignatych in a squeaky
voice.
"I beg your pardon!" I said. "There is one more condition.
Inasmuch as we intend to fight to the death, we are obliged to
take every precaution that this encounter should remain a secret
and that our seconds should bear no responsibility. Do you
agree?"
"We agree fully."
"This is what has occurred to me. Do you see the narrow
ledge on top of that sheer cliff to the right? The drop from there
to the bottom is a good thirty sagenes, if not more; down below
there are jagged rocks. Each of us will take his position on the
very edge of the shelf, which will make even a slight wound
mortal; that should coincide with your wishes since you
yourselves set the distance at six paces. If one of us is wounded
he will inevitably go over and be dashed to pieces; the doctor
will remove the bullet, and the sudden death can easily be
explained as an accident. We shall draw lots to see who is to
shoot first. In conclusion I wish to make it clear that I shall
fight on no other terms."
"Let it be so!" said the captain after a meaning look at
Grushnitsky, who nodded his concurrence. His facial
expression changed every moment. I had placed him in a
difficult position. Under ordinary conditions, he could have
aimed at my leg and wounded me lightly, thus getting his
revenge without laying too heavy a burden on his conscience.
Now, however, he either had to fire into the air or become a
murderer, or, finally, abandon his dastardly scheme and run the
same risk as I. I would not have wished to be in his boots at
that moment. He led the captain aside and began to talk to him
very heatedly; I noticed how his lips, now turned bluish,
quivered. The captain, however, turned away from him with a
contemptuous smile. "You are a fool!" he said to Grushnitsky
rather loudly. "You don't understand anything. Let us go,
gentlemen!"
A narrow path winding between the bushes led up the steep
incline; broken fragments of rock formed the precarious steps
of this natural staircase; clutching at the bushes, we began
climbing. Grushnitsky went ahead, followed by his seconds,
and the doctor and I came last.
"You amaze me," said the doctor, clasping my hand
warmly. "Let me feel your pulse. Oho, it's pounding feverishly!
But your face betrays nothing; only your eyes shine brighter
than usual."
Suddenly small stones rolled noisily down to our feet. What
had happened? Grushnitsky had stumbled; the branch he had
been holding on to snapped and he would have fallen
backwards had his seconds not supported him.
"Take care!" I called out to him. "Don't fall too soon; it's an
ill omen. Remember Julius Caesar!"
Finally we reached the top of the projecting cliff. The ledge
was covered with fine sand as if specially spread there for the
duel. All around, wrapped in the golden mist of morning, the
mountain peaks clustered like a numberless herd, while in the
south Elbrus loomed white, bringing up the rear of a chain of
icy summits among which roamed the feathery clouds blown in
from the east. I walked to the brink of the ledge and looked
down; my head nearly swam. Down below it was dark and cold
as in a grave, and the moss-grown jagged rocks hurled down by
storm and time awaited their prey.
The ledge on which we were to fight formed an almost
regular triangle. Six paces were measured off from the
projecting angle, and it was decided that he who would first
have to face his opponent's fire should stand at the very edge
with his back to the abyss; if he was not killed, the adversaries
were to change places.
I decided to give Grushnitsky every advantage, for I wanted
to try him; a spark of generosity might have been awakened in
his soul, in which case everything would have turned out for
the best; but vanity and weakness of character were bound to
triumph. . . . I wanted to give myself full justification for
allowing him no quarter if fate spared me. Who has not thus
struck a bargain with his conscience?
"Cast the lots, doctor!" said the captain.
The doctor produced a silver coin from his pocket and held
it aloft.
"Tail!" cried Grushnitsky suddenly, like a man just
awakened by a friendly nudge.
"Head!"' said I.
The coin rose into the air and came down with a clink; we
all rushed over to look at it.
"You're lucky," I said to Grushnitsky, "you are to shoot first.
But remember, if you do not kill me, I shall not miss—I give
you my word of honour."
He flushed; the thought of killing an unarmed man filled
him with shame. I looked at him intently, and for a moment I
thought he would throw himself at my feet and beg my
forgiveness; but how could he confess to a scheme so vile? One
way out remained for him: to fire into the air; I was certain he
would fire into the air! Only one thing might prevent him from
doing so: the thought that I might demand a second duel.
"It's time now!" the doctor whispered to me, tugging at my
sleeve. "If you will not tell them now that we know their
intention all will be lost. See, he is loading already. If you will
not, I shall tell them. . . . "
"Certainly not, doctor!" I replied, holding him by the aim.
"You will spoil everything; you gave me your word you would
not interfere. . . . And why should it concern you? Perhaps I
want to be killed."
He looked at me in amazement.
"Oh, that's another matter! Only don't blame me in the other
world. . . . "
Meanwhile the captain had loaded his pistols. One he gave
Grushnitsky, smilingly whispering something to him, the other
to me.
I took my place at the far corner of the ledge, firmly bracing
my left foot against the rock and leaning slightly forward so as
not to fall backwards in case I was lightly wounded.
Grushnitsky took his place opposite me, and when the
signal was given, started to raise the pistol. His knees shook.
He aimed straight at my forehead. . . .
Savage anger welled up in my heart.
Suddenly he lowered the muzzle of his pistol and going as
white as a sheet turned to his second.
"I cannot do it," he said hoarsely.
"Coward!" replied the captain.
The shot rang out. The bullet scratched my knee.
Involuntarily I took a few steps forward to get away from the
brink as quickly as possible.
"Well, brother Grushnitsky, it is a pity you missed!" said the
captain. "Now it's your turn, take your place! Embrace me
before you go, for we shall meet no more!" They embraced, the
captain scarcely able to restrain himself from laughter. "Don't
be afraid," he added, with a sly look at Grushnitsky,
"everything in the world's a pack of nonsense! Nature, fate, life
itself, all are but worthless pelf!"
This tragic utterance made with due solemnity, the captain
withdrew to his place. With tears in his eyes, Ivan Ignatych
also embraced Grushnitsky, and now the latter remained alone
facing me. To this day I have tried to explain to myself the
emotion that then surged in my breast: it was the vexation of
injured vanity, and contempt, and wrath born of the realization
that this man who was now eyeing me so coolly, with such
calm insolence, two minutes before had sought to kill me like a
dog without endangering himself in the slightest, for had I been
wounded a little more severely in the leg I would certainly
have toppled over the cliff.
I looked him squarely in the face for a few minutes, trying
to detect the slightest sign of repentance. Instead I thought I
saw him suppressing a smile.
"I advise you to say your prayers before you die," I told him
then.
"You need not be more concerned about my soul than your
own. I only beg of you to fire with the least delay."
"And you will not retract your slander? Or apologize to me?
Think well, has your conscience nothing to say to you?"
"Mr. Pechorin!" shouted the captain of dragoons. "You are
not here to preach, allow me to observe. . . . Let us get it over
and done with as quickly as possible. Someone might ride
through the gorge and see us."
"Very well. Doctor, will you come to me?"
The doctor came over. Poor doctor! He was paler than
Grushnitsky had been ten minutes before.
I spoke the following words with deliberation, loudly and
distinctly, as sentences of death are pronounced:
"Doctor, these gentlemen, no doubt in their haste, forgot to
put a bullet into my pistol; I beg you to reload it—and well!"
"It can't be!'' cried the captain. "It can't be! I loaded both
pistols; the bullet may have rolled out of yours. . . . That's not
my fault! And you have no right to reload ... no light
whatsoever ... it is most decidedly against the rules. I shall not
allow it. . . . "
"Good!" I said to the captain. "If so, you and I shall shoot it
out on the same terms. . . . "
He did not know what to say.
Grushnitsky stood there, head sunk on his breast,
embarrassed and gloomy.
"Let them do as they wish!" he finally told the captain, who
was trying to wrench my pistol from the doctor's hand. "You
know yourself that they are right."
In vain the captain made signs to him; Grushnitsky did not
even look up.
Meanwhile the doctor loaded the pistol and handed it to me.
Seeing this, the captain spat and stamped his foot. "You are
a fool, my friend," he said, "a damned fool. Once you trusted
me, you should have listened to me in everything. . . . You are
getting what you deserve, so go ahead and die like a fly!" He
turned away, muttering, "but it is altogether against the rules."
"Grushnitsky!" said I. "There still is time; retract your
calumny and I shall forgive you everything. You have failed to
make a fool of me, and my vanity is satisfied. Remember that
once we were friends. . . . "
His face twisted with passion, his eyes flashed.
"Fire!" he replied. "I despise myself and hate you. If you do
not kill me, I shall stab you in the back some night. The world
is too small to hold us both. . . . "
I fired.
When the smoke cleared, there was no Grushnitsky on the
ledge. Only a thin pillar of dust curled over the brink of the
precipice.
Everybody cried out at once.
"Finita la commedia!" I said to the doctor.
He did not reply, but turned away in horror.
I shrugged my shoulders and bowed to Grushnitsky's
seconds.
As I came down the path I saw Grushnitsky's bloodstained
corpse between the clefts in the rocks. Involuntarily I closed
my eyes.
Untying my horse, I set out for home at a walking pace. My
heart was heavy within me. The sun seemed to have lost its
brilliance and its rays did not warm me. Before reaching the
settlement I turned into a gorge on my right. I could not have
endured to see anyone just then; I wanted to be alone. With the
reins hanging loose and my head sunk on my breast, I rode on
for some time until I found myself in an entirely unfamiliar
spot.
I turned back and sought the roadway. The sun was setting
when I reached Kislovodsk, a spent man on a spent horse.
My manservant told me that Werner had called and gave me
two notes, one from him, and the other from Vera. I opened the
first; it contained the following:
"Everything has been arranged as well as possible; the
mutilated body has been brought in, and the bullet removed
from the breast. Everybody believes that his death was
accidental; only the commandant, who probably knows of your
quarrel, shook his head, but said nothing. There is no evidence
against you and you may rest in peace . . . if you can. Goodbye. . . . " I hesitated long before opening the second note.
What could she have to write to me? An ominous presentiment
racked my soul.
Here it is, that letter whose every word ineffaceably seared
itself into my memory:
"I am writing to you quite certain that we shall never meet
again. When we parted several years ago, I thought the same;
but it pleased heaven to try me a second time; I did not
withstand the test, my weak heart was again conquered by that
familiar voice . . . but you will not despise me for it, will you?
This letter is at once a farewell and a confession: I must tell
you everything that has been stored in my heart ever since it
first learned to love you. I shall not accuse you—you behaved
to me as any other man might have done; you loved me as your
property, as a source of the reciprocal joys, fears and sorrows
without which life would be wearisome and monotonous. I
realized that from the very beginning. . . . But you were
unhappy, and I sacrificed myself in the hope that some day you
would appreciate my sacrifice, that some day you would
understand my infinite tenderness which nothing could affect.
Much time has passed since then; I have fathomed all the
secrets of your soul. . . and I see that mine was a vain hope.
How it hurt me! But my love and my soul have melted into
one: the flame is dimmer, but it has not died.
"We are parting forever; yet you may be certain that I shall
never love another; my soul has spent all its treasures, its tears
and hopes on you. She who has once loved you cannot but
regard other men with some measure of contempt, not because
you are better than they—oh no!—but because there is
something unique in your nature, something peculiar to you
alone, something so proud and unfathomable; whatever you
may be saying, your voice holds an invincible power; in no one
is the desire to be loved so constant as in you; in no one is evil
so attractive; in no one's glance is there such a promise of bliss;
nobody knows better than you how to use his advantages, and
no one else can be so genuinely unhappy as you, because
nobody tries as hard as you to convince himself of the contrary.
"Now I must explain the reason for my hasty departure; it
will strike you as of little consequence because it concerns me
alone.
"This morning my husband came to me and told me about
your quarrel with Grushnitsky. My face must have given me
away, for he looked me straight in the eyes, long and
searchingly; I nearly fainted at the thought that you would have
to fight a duel and that I was the cause; I thought I would lose
my mind. . . . Now, however, when I can reason clearly, I am
certain that you will live; it is impossible that you should die
without me, impossible! My husband paced the room for a long
time; I do not know what he said to me, nor do I remember
what I replied. . . . I probably told him that I loved you. . . . I
only remember that at the end of our conversation he insulted
me with a terrible word and left the room. I heard him order the
carriage. . . . For three hours now I have been sitting at the
window and awaiting your return. . . . But you are alive, you
cannot die! The carriage is almost ready. . . . Farewell,
farewell! I am lost—but what of it? If I could be certain that
you will always remember me—I say nothing of loving me, no
—only remember. . . . Good-bye! They are coming. . . . I have
to hide this letter. . . .
"You do not love Mary, do you? You will not marry her?
Oh, but you must make this sacrifice for me; I have given up
everything in the world for your sake. . . . "
Like a madman I dashed outside, leapt into the saddle of
my horse who was being led across the courtyard, and set off at
full gallop along the road to Pyatigorsk. I mercilessly spurred
on the exhausted beast which, panting and covered with froth,
sped me along the rocky road.
The sun had vanished into a black cloud resting on the
mountain range in the west, and it turned dark and damp in the
gorge. The Podkumok picked its way through the rocks with a
dull and monotonous roar. Breathless with impatience I
galloped on. The thought that I might not find her in Pyatigorsk
pounded like a sledge-hammer at my heart. Oh, but to see her
for a minute, only one more minute, to say good-bye, to clasp
her hand. . . . I prayed, I cursed, I cried, I laughed ... no, no
words can express my anxiety, my despair. Now that I realized
I might lose her forever, Vera became for me the most precious
thing on earth, more precious than life, honour or happiness!
God only knows what odd, wild ideas swarmed in my head. . . .
And all the while I rode on, spurring my horse mercilessly.
Finally I noticed that the animal was breathing more
laboriously, and once or twice he stumbled on a level stretch.
There still remained five versts to Essentuki, a Cossack hamlet
where I could get another mount.
Everything would have been redeemed had my horse had
the strength to carry on for another ten minutes. But suddenly,
at a sharp bend in the road coming up from a shallow ravine as
we were emerging from the hills, he crashed to the ground. I
leapt nimbly out of the saddle; but try as I might to get him up,
pull as I might at the reins, my efforts were in vain. A scarcely
audible groan escaped from between his clenched teeth and a
few minutes later he was dead. I was left alone in the steppe,
my last hope gone; I tried to continue on foot, but my knees
gave way and exhausted by the day's anxieties and the sleepless
night, I fell onto the wet grass and wept like a child.
I lay there for a long time motionless and wept bitterly
without trying to check the tears and sobs; I thought my breast
would be rent asunder. All my resolution, all my composure
vanished like smoke; my spirit was impotent, my reason
paralyzed, and had someone seen me at that moment he would
have turned away in contempt.
When the nocturnal dew and mountain breeze had cooled
my fevered brow and my thoughts became collected once
more, I realized it was useless and senseless to pursue a
happiness that was lost. What more did I want? To see her?
Why? Was not everything over between us? One bitter farewell
kiss would not make my memories sweeter, and it only would
be the harder to part.
It is pleasant for me to know, however, that I can weep!
Although, the real reason was perhaps frayed nerves, the
sleepless night, the two minutes I had stood looking at the
muzzle of a pistol, and an empty stomach.
Everything works out for the best. As for this new sensation
of pain, it served as a happy diversion, to employ a military
term. It does one good to weep, and had I not ridden my horse
to death and then been compelled to walk the fifteen versts
back, I perhaps should not have closed my eyes that night
either.
I returned to Kislovodsk at five o'clock in the morning,
threw myself on the bed and slept like Napoleon after
Waterloo.
When I woke up, it was dark outside. Unfastening my
jacket, I sat at an open window—and the breeze from the
mountains cooled my breast not yet becalmed even by the
heavy sleep of fatigue. Way out beyond the river the lights of
the fort and the village twinkled through the thick crowns of
the overshadowing lindens. The courtyard was deadly still, and
the Princess' house plunged into darkness.
The doctor entered. His brow was furrowed, and contrary to
his wont he did not offer me his hand.
"Where have you come from, doctor?"
"From Princess Ligovskaya's. Her daughter is ill—nervous
breakdown. . . . But that's not why I am here; the trouble is that
the authorities are beginning to suspect, and though nothing
definite can be proved I would advise you to be more cautious.
The Princess just told me that she was aware you fought a duel
because of her daughter. That old man—what's his name?—
told her. He witnessed your altercation with Grushnitsky in the
restaurant. I came to warn you. So good-bye—perhaps we shall
not see each other again—very likely you'll be sent away."
He paused on the threshold; he wanted to shake my hand.
And had I given him the slightest encouragement he would
have flung himself on my neck; but I remained as cold as a
stone, and he went away.
That is just like human beings! They are all alike; though
fully aware in advance of all the evil aspects of a deed, they aid
and abet and even give their approbation to it when they see
there is no other way out—and then they wash their hands of it
and turn away with disapproval from him who dared assume
the full burden of responsibility. They are all alike, even the
kindest and wisest of them!
The following morning, when I had received orders from
my superiors to report at the fort of N., I dropped in at the
Princess' to say good-bye.
Princess Ligovskaya was taken aback when in reply to her
question whether I had anything important to tell her I merely
said that I had come to say good-bye.
"I must have a very serious talk with you, however."
I sat down without saying a word.
It was obvious she was at a loss how to begin; her face went
red and she drummed her stubby fingers on the table. Finally
she began haltingly:
"Monsieur Pechorin, I believe you are an honourable man."
I bowed.
"I am even certain of it," she continued, "though your
conduct has been somewhat questionable. You may have your
reasons, however, of which I am not aware, and if so, you must
share them with me now. You protected my daughter from
calumny, engaged in a duel on her behalf, and risked your life
in doing so. . . . Pray do not reply, for I know you will not
admit it because Grushnitsky is dead." (She crossed herself.)
"God forgive him, and you too, I hope! That is none of my
concern. . . . I have no right to condemn you, for it was my
daughter, blameless though she is, who was the cause. She has
told me everything ... everything, I am sure. You have declared
you love her, and she has confessed her love for you." (Here
the Princess drew a deep sigh.) "But she is ill and I am certain
that it is not an ordinary malady. Some secret grief is killing
her; she does not admit it, but I am certain that you are the
cause. . . . Listen to me: you perhaps think that I am after rank
and immense riches—if so, you are mistaken; I seek only my
daughter's happiness. Your present position is unenviable, but it
may mend. You are wealthy; my daughter loves you, and her
upbringing is such that she can make her husband happy. I am
rich, and she is my only child. . . . Tell me, what is it that
deters you? I should not have told you all this, but I rely upon
your heart and honour—remember that I have only one
daughter . . . only one. . . . " She began to sob.
"Princess," I said, "I cannot answer you; allow me to speak
to your daughter alone."
"Never!" she cried, rising from her chair in great agitation.
"As you wish," replied I, preparing to leave. She thought it
over, motioned me to wait, and left the room. Some five
minutes passed; my heart pounded, but my thoughts were
orderly and my head cool. Search as I might in my breast for
even the tiniest spark of love for the charming Mary, all my
efforts were in vain.
The door opened and she entered. Heavens! How she had
changed, since I saw her last—and that but a short while ago!
When she reached the middle of the room she swayed; I
leapt to her side, offered her my arm and led her to an armchair.
I stood facing her. For a long time neither of us said a word;
her big eyes full of ineffable sorrow seemed to search mine
with something akin to hope; in vain her pale lips tried to
smile; her delicate hands folded on her knees were so fragile
and transparent that I began to feel sorry for her.
"Princess," said I, "you know I have mocked at you, do you
not? You must despise me."
A feverish flush mantled her cheeks.
"Hence, you cannot love me. . . . " I continued.
She turned away, leaned her elbows on the table and
covered her eyes with her hand, and I thought I saw tears
glistening in them.
"My God!" she said scarcely audibly.
The situation grew unbearable; in another minute I should
have thrown myself at her feet.
"So you see for yourself," I said in as steady a voice as I
could, forcing a smile, "you see for yourself that I cannot marry
you. Even if you wished me to do so now, you would regret the
decision very soon. The talk I had with your mother compels
me to speak with you now so frankly and brutally; I hope she is
mistaken but you can easily undeceive her. As you can see I am
playing a most contemptible and disgusting role in your eyes,
and I admit it; that is the most I can do for you. However bad
your opinion may be of me, I shall accept it. You see I am
abasing myself before you. . . . Even if you had loved me, you
would despise me from this moment—now, wouldn't you?"
She turned to me a face as pale as marble but with eyes
flashing wondrously.
"I hate you ..." she said.
I thanked her, bowed respectfully and walked out.
An hour later a post troika was carrying me rapidly from
Kislovodsk. A few versts from Essentuki I descried the carcase
of my steed by the roadside; the saddle had been removed—
probably by some passing Cossack— and in its place two
ravens now sat on the horse's back. I sighed and turned
away. . . .
And now, here in this dreary fort, as my mind dwells on the
past, I frequently ask myself: why did I not wish to tread the
path fate held open to me with a promise of tranquil joys and
peace of mind? No, I could never have reconciled myself to
such a lot. I am like a mariner born and bred on board a
buccaneer brig whose soul has become so inured to storm and
strife that if cast ashore he would weary and languish no matter
how alluring the shady groves and how bright the gentle sun.
All day long he paces the sandy beach, hearkening to the
monotonous roar of the breakers and gazing into the hazy
distance to catch in the pale strip dividing the blue deep from
the grey clouds the flash of the long-awaited sail that at first is
like the wing of a sea-gull and then gradually stands out from
the white of the spray as it steadily makes for its lonely
anchorage. . . . 