Title: Robert Kennedy Saved From Drowning
Author: Donald Barthelme

From "Robert Kennedy And His Times," by Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., paperback edition, pp.
877-8 (footnote)...
"I never met Robert Kennedy nor did I talk to people who had. The story was
begun while I was living in Denmark in 1965...the only 'true' thing in it was
Kennedy's remark about the painter. I happened to be in the gallery when he
came in with a group; I think the artist was Kenneth Noland. Kennedy made the
remark quoted about the ruler---not the newest joke in the world. The story was
published in New American Review well before the assassination. I cannot
account for the concluding impulse of the I-character to 'save' him other than by
reference to John Kennedy's death; still, a second assassination was unthinkable
at that time. In sum, any precision in the piece was the result of watching
television and reading the New York Times." (Barthelme to author, July 16,
1977.)
* * *

K at His Desk
He is neither abrupt with nor excessively kind to associates. Or he is both abrupt and kind.
The telephone is, for him, a whip, a lash, but also a conduit for soothing words, a sink into
which he can hurl gallons of syrup if it comes to that. He reads quickly, scratching brief
comments ("Yes," "No") in corners of the paper. He slouches in the leather chair, looking about
him with a slightly irritated air for new visitors, new difficulties. He spends his time sending
and receiving messengers. "I spend my time sending and receiving messengers," he says.
"Some of these messages are important. Others are not."
Described by Secretaries
A: "Quite frankly I think he forgets a lot of things. But the things he forgets are those
which are inessential. I even think he might forget deliberately, to leave his mind free. He has
the ability to get rid of unimportant details. And he does." B: "Once when I was sick, I hadn't
heard from him, and I thought he had forgotten me. You know usually your boss will send
flowers or something like that. I was in the hospital, and I was mighty blue. I was in a room
with another girl, and her boss hadn't sent her anything either. Then suddenly the door opened
and there he was with the biggest bunch of yellow tulips I'd ever seen in my life. And the other
girl's boss was with him, and he had tulips too. They were standing there with all those tulips,
smiling. "
Behind the Bar
At a crowded party, he wanders behind the bar to make himself a Scotch and water. His
hand is on the bottle of Scotch, his glass is waiting. The bartender, a small man in a beige
uniform with gilt buttons, politely asks K. to return to the other side, the guests' side, of the
bar. "You let one behind here, they all be behind here," the bartender says.
K Reading the Newspaper
His reactions are impossible to catalogue. Often he will find a note that amuses him

endlessly, some anecdote involving, say, a fireman who has propelled his apparatus at record-
breaking speed to the wrong address. These small stories are clipped, carried about in a
pocket, to be produced at appropriate moments for the pleasure of friends. Other
manifestations please him less. An account of an earthquake in Chile, with its thousands of
dead and homeless, may depress him for weeks. He memorizes the terrible statistics, quoting
them everywhere and saying, with a grave look "We must do something." Important actions
often follow, sometimes within a matter of hours. (On the other hand, these two kinds of
responses may be, on a given day, inexplicably reversed. ) The more trivial aspects of the daily
itemization are skipped. While reading, he maintains a rapid drumming of his fingertips on the
desktop. He receives twelve newspapers, but of these, only four are regarded as serious.
Attitude Toward His Work
"Sometimes I can't seem to do anything. The work is there, piled up, it seems to me an
insurmountable obstacle, really out of reach. I sit and look at it, wondering where to begin,
how to take hold of it. Perhaps I pick up a piece of paper, try to read it but my mind is
elsewhere, I am thinking of something else, I can't seem to get the gist of it, it seems
meaningless, devoid of interest, not having to do with human affairs, drained of life. Then, in
an hour, or even a moment, everything changes suddenly I realize I only have to do it, hurl
myself into the midst of it, proceed mechanically, the first thing and then the second thing,
that it is simply a matter of moving from one step to the next, plowing through it. I become
interested, I become excited, I work very fast, things fall into place, I am exhilarated, amazed
that these things could ever have seemed dead to me."
Sleeping On the Stones of Unknown Towns (Rimbaud)
K. is walking, with that familiar slight dip of the shoulders, through the streets of a small
city in France or Germany. The shop signs are in a language which alters when inspected
closely, MOBEL becoming MEUBLES for example, and the citizens mutter to themselves with
dark virtuosity a mixture of languages. K. is very interested, looks closely at everything, at the
shops, the goods displayed, he clothing of the people, the tempo of street life, the citizens
themselves, wondering about them. What are their water needs?
"In the West, wisdom is mostly gained at lunch. At lunch, people tell you things." The
nervous eyes of the waiters. The tall bald cook, white apron, white T-shirt, grinning through an
opening in the wall. "Why is that cook looking at me?"
Urban Transportation
"The transportation problems of our cities and their rapidly expanding suburbs are the
most urgent and neglected transporta- tion problems confronting the country. In these heavily
popu- lated and industrialized areas, people are dependent on a system of transportation that
is at once complex and inadequate. Obsolete facilities and growing demands have created
seemingly insoluble difficulties and present methods of dealing with these difficulties offer little
prospect of relief."
K Penetrated with Sadness
He hears something playing on someone else's radio, in another part of the building. The
music is wretchedly sad; now he can (barely) hear it, now it fades into the wall. He turns on
his own radio There it is, on his own radio, the same music. The sound fills the room.
Karsh of Ottawa
"We sent a man to Karsh of Ottawa and told him that we admired his work very much.
Especially, I don't know, the Churchill thing and, you know, the Hemingway thing, and all that.
And we told him we wanted to set up a sitting for K. sometime in June, if that would be
convenient for him, and he said yes, that was okay, June was okay, and where did we want to
have it shot, there or in New York or where. Well, that was a problem because we didn't know
exactly what K.'s schedule would be for June, it was up in the air, so we tentatively said New
York around the fifteenth. And he said, that was okay, he could do that. And he wanted to
know how much time he could have, and we said, well, how much time do you need? And he
said he didn't know, it varied from sitter to sitter. He said some people were very restless and
that made it difficult to get just the right shot. He said there was one shot in each sitting that
was, you know, the key shot, the right one. He said he'd have to see, when the time came."
Dress
He is neatly dressed in a manner that does not call attention to itself. The suits are soberly
cut and in dark colors. He must at all times present an aspect of freshness difficult to sustain
because of frequent movements from place to place under conditions which are not always the
most favorable. Thus he changes clothes frequently, especially shirts. In the course of a day he
changes his shirt many times. There are always extra shirts about, in boxes. "Which of you has
the shirts?"
A Friend Comments K's Aloneness
"The thing you have to realize about K. is that essentially he's absolutely alone in the
world. There's this terrible loneliness which prevents people from getting too close to him.
Maybe it comes from something in his childhood, I don't know. But he's very hard to get to
know, and a lot of people who think they know him rather well don't really know him at all. He
says something or does something that surprises you, and you realize that all along you really
didn't know him at all. "He has surprising facets. I remember once we were out in a small
boat. K. of course was the captain. Some rough weather came up and we began to head back
in. I began worrying about picking up a landing and I said to him that I didn't think the anchor
would hold, with the wind and all. He just looked at me. Then he said 'Of course it will hold.
That's what it's for."'
K on Crowds
"There are exhausted crowds and vivacious crowds. "Sometimes, standing there, I can
sense whether a particular crowd is one thing or the other. Sometimes the mood of the crowd
is disguised, sometimes you only find out after a quarter of an hour what sort of crowd a
particular crowd is. "And you can't speak to them in the same way. The variations have to be
taken into account. You have to say something to them that is meaningful to them in that
mood "
Gallery-going
K. enters a large gallery on Fifty-seventh Street, in the Fuller Building. His entourage
includes several ladies and gentlemen. Works by a geometricist are on show. K. Iooks at the
immense, rather theoretical paintings. "Well, at least we know he has a ruler." The group
dissolves in laughter. People repeat the remark to one another, laughing. The artist, who has
been standing behind a dealer, regards K. with hatred.
K Puzzled by His Children
The children are crying. There are several children, one about four, a boy, then another
boy, slightly older, and a little girl, very beautiful, wearing blue jeans, crying. There are various
objects on the grass, an electric train, a picture book, a red ball, a plastic bucket, a plastic
shovel. K. frowns at the children whose distress issues from no source immediately available to
the eye, which seems indeed uncaused, vacant, a general anguish. K. turns to the mother of
these children who is standing nearby wearing hip-huggers which appear to be made of linked
marshmallows studded with dia- monds but then I am a notoriously poor observer. "Play with
them," he says. This mother of ten quietly suggests that K. himself "play with them. " K. picks
up the picture book and begins to read to the children. But the book has a German text. It has
been left behind, perhaps, by some foreign visitor. Nevertheless K. perseveres. "A ist der Affe,
er isst mit der Pfote." ("A is the Ape, he eats with his Paw.") The crying of the children
continues.
A Dream
Orange trees. Overhead, a steady stream of strange aircraft which resemble kitchen
implements, bread boards, cookie sheets, colanders. The shiny aluminum instruments are on
their way to complete the bombings of Sidi-Madani. A farm in the hills.
Matters (from an Administrative Assistant)
"A lot of matters that had been pending came to a head right about that time, moved to
the front burner, things we absolutely had to take care of. And we couldn't find K. Nobody
knew where he was. We had looked everywhere. He had just withdrawn, made himself
unavailable. There was this one matter that was probably more pressing than all the rest put
together. Really crucial. We were all standing around wondering what to do. We were getting
pretty nervous because this thing was really. . . Then K. walked in and disposed of it with a
quick phone call. A quick phone call!"
Childhood of K as Recalled by a Former Teacher
"He was a very alert boy, very bright, good at his studies, very thorough, very
conscientious. But that's not unusual, that de- scribes a good number of the boys who pass
through here. It's not unusual, that is, to find these qualities which are after all the qualities
that we look for and encourage in them. What was unusual about K. was his compassion,
something very rare for a boy of that age---even if they have it, they're usually very careful
not to display it for fear of seeming soft, girlish. I remember, though, that in K. this particular
attribute was very marked. I would almost say that it was his strongest characteristic."
Speaking to No One but Waiters, He---
"The dandelion salad with bacon, I think."
"The rysstafel."
"The poached duck."
"The black bean puree."
"The cod fritters."
K Explains a Technique
"It's an expedient in terms of how not to destroy a situation which has been a long time
gestating, or, again, how to break it up if it appears that the situation has changed, during the
gestation period, into one whose implications are not quite what they were at the beginning.
What I mean is that in this business things are constantly altering (usually for the worse) and
usually you want to give the impression that you're not watching this particular situation
particularly closely, that you're paying no special attention to it, until you're ready to make
your move. That is, it's best to be sudden, if you can manage it. Of course you can't do that all
the time. Sometimes you're just completely wiped out, cleaned out, totaled, and then the only
thing to do is shrug and forget about it."
K on His Own Role
"Sometimes it seems to me that it doesn't matter what I do, that it is enough to exist, to
sit somewhere, in a garden for example, watching whatever is to be seen there, the small
events. At other times, I'm aware that other people, possibly a great number of other people,
could be affected by what I do or fail to do, that I have a responsibility, as we all have, to
make the best possible use of whatever talents I've been given, for the common good. It is not
enough to sit in that garden, however restful or pleasurable it might be. The world is full of
unsolved problems, situations that demand careful, reasoned and intelligent action. In Latin
America, for example."
As Entrepreneur
The original cost estimates for burying the North Sea pipeline have been exceeded by a
considerable margin. Everyone wonders what he will say about this contretemps which does
not fail to have its dangers for those responsible for the costly miscalcula- tions, which are
viewed in many minds as inexcusable. He says only "Exceptionally difficult rock conditions."
With Young People
K., walking the streets of unknown towns, finds himself among young people. Young
people line these streets, narrow and curving, which are theirs, dedicated to them. They are
every- where, resting on the embankments, their guitars, small radios, long hair. They sit on
the sidewalks, back to back, heads turned to stare. They stand implacably on street corners, in
doorways, or lean on their elbows in windows, or squat in small groups at that place where the
sidewalk meets the walls of buildings. The streets are filled with these young people who say
nothing, reveal only a limited interest, refuse to declare themselves. Street after street
contains them, a great number, more displayed as one turns a corner, rank upon rank
stretching into the distance, drawn from the arcades, the plazas, staring.
He Discusses the French Writer, Poulet
"For Poulet, it is not enough to speak of seizing the moment. It is rather a question of, and
I quote, 'recognizing in the instant which lives and dies, which surges out of nothingness and
which ends in dream, an intensity and depth of significance which ordinarily attaches only to
the whole of existence.' "What Poulet is describing is neither an ethic nor a prescription but
rather what he has discovered in the work of Marivaux. Poulet has taken up the Marivaudian
canon and squeezed it with both hands to discover the essence of what may be called the
Marivaudian being, what Poulet in fact calls the Marivaudian being. "The Marivaudian being is,
according to Poulet, a pastless futureless man, born anew at every instant. The instants are
points which organize themselves into a line, but what is important is the instant, not the line.
The Marivaudian being has in a sense no history. Nothing follows from what has gone before.
He is constantly surprised. He cannot predict his own reaction to events. He is constantly being
overtaken by events. A condition of breathlessness and dazzlement surrounds him. In
consequence he exists in a certain freshness which seems, if I may say so, very desirable. This
freshness Poulet, quoting Marivaux, describes very well. "
K Saved from Drowning
K. in the water. His flat black hat, his black cape, his sword are on the shore. He retains
his mask. His hands beat the surface of the water which tears and rips about him. The white
foam, the green depths. I throw a line, the coils leaping out over the surface of the water. He
has missed it. No, it appears that he has it. His right hand (sword arm) grasps the line that I
have thrown him. I am on the bank, the rope wound round my waist, braced against a rock. K.
now has both hands on the line. I pull him out of the water. He stands now on the bank,
gasping. "Thank you."