Title: Victory Lap 
Author: George Saunders

Three days shy of her fifteenth birthday, Alison
Pope paused at the top of the stairs.
Say the staircase was marble. Say she descended
and all heads turned. Where was {special one}?
Approaching now, bowing slightly, he exclaimed,
How can so much grace be contained in one small
package? Oops. Had he said small package? And
just stood there? Broad princelike face totally bland
of expression? Poor thing! Sorry, no way, down he
went, he was definitely not {special one}.
What about this guy, behind Mr. Small Package,
standing near the home entertainment center? With
a thick neck of farmer integrity yet tender ample
lips, who, placing one hand on the small of her
back, whispered, Dreadfully sorry you had to
endure that bit about the small package just now.
Let us go stand on the moon. Or, uh, in the moon.
In the moonlight.
Had he said, Let us go stand on the moon? If so,
she would have to be like, {eyebrows up}. And if no
wry acknowledgment was forthcoming, be like, Uh,
I am not exactly dressed for standing on the moon,
which, as I understand it, is super-cold?
Come on, guys, she couldn’t keep treading
gracefully on this marble staircase in her mind
forever! That dear old white-hair in the tiara was
getting all like, Why are those supposed princes
making that darling girl march in place ad nausea?
Plus she had a recital tonight and had to go fetch
her tights from the dryer.
Egads! One found oneself still standing at the top of
the stairs.
Do the thing where, facing upstairs, hand on railing,
you hop down the stairs one at a time, which was
getting a lot harder lately, due to, someone’s feet
were getting longer every day, seemed like.
Pas de chat, pas de chat.
Changement, changement.
Hop over thin metal thingie separating hallway tile
from living-room rug.
Curtsy to self in entryway mirror.
Come on, Mom, get here. We do not wish to be
castrigated by Ms. Callow again in the wings.
Although actually she loved Ms. C. So strict! Also
loved the other girls in class. And the girls from
school. Loved them. Everyone was so nice. Plus
the boys at her school. Plus the teachers at her
school. All of them were doing their best. Actually,
she loved her whole town. That adorable grocer,
spraying his lettuce! Pastor Carol, with her large
comfortable butt! The chubby postman,
gesticulating with his padded envelopes! It had
once been a mill town. Wasn’t that crazy? What did
that even mean?
Also she loved her house. Across the creek was the
Russian church. So ethnic! That onion dome had
loomed in her window since her Pooh footie days.
Also loved Gladsong Drive. Every house on
Gladsong was a Corona del Mar. That was
amazing! If you had a friend on Gladsong, you
already knew where everything was in his or her
home.
Jeté, jeté, rond de jambe.
Pas de bourrée.
On a happy whim, do front roll, hop to your feet,
kiss the picture of Mom and Dad taken at Penney’s
back in the Stone Ages, when you were that little
cutie right there {kiss} with a hair bow bigger than
all outdoors.
Sometimes, feeling happy like this, she imagined a
baby deer trembling in the woods.
Where’s your mama, little guy?
I don’t know, the deer said in the voice of Heather’s
little sister Becca.
Are you afraid? she asked it. Are you hungry? Do
you want me to hold you?
O.K., the baby deer said.
Here came the hunter now, dragging the deer’s
mother by the antlers. Her guts were completely
splayed. Jeez, that was nice! She covered the
baby’s eyes and was like, Don’t you have anything
better to do, dank hunter, than kill this baby’s mom?
You seem like a nice enough guy.
Is my mom killed? the baby said in Becca’s voice.
No, no, she said. This gentleman was just leaving.
The hunter, captivated by her beauty, toffed or
doffed his cap, and, going down on one knee, said,
If I could will life back into this fawn, I would do so,
in hopes you might defer one tender kiss upon our
elderly forehead.
Go, she said. Only, for your task of penance do not
eat her. Lay her out in a field of clover, with roses
strewn about her. And bestow a choir, to softly sing
of her foul end.
Lay who out? the baby deer said.
No one, she said. Never mind. Stop asking so
many questions.
Pas de chat, pas de chat.
Changement, changement.
She felt hopeful that {special one} would hail from
far away. The local boys possessed a certain je ne
sais quoi, which, tell the truth, she was
not très crazy about, such as: actually named their
own nuts. She had overheard that! And aspired to
work for County Power because the work shirts
were awesome and you got them free.
So ixnay on the local boys. A special ixnay on Matt
Drey, owner of the largest mouth in the land.
Kissing him last night at the pep rally had been like
kissing an underpass. Scary! Kissing Matt was like
suddenly this cow in a sweater is bearing down on
you, who will not take no for an answer, and his
huge cow head is being flooded by chemicals that
are drowning out what little powers of reason Matt
actually did have.
What she liked was being in charge of her. Her
body, her mind. Her thoughts, her career, her
future.
That was what she liked.
So be it.
We might have a slight snack.
Un petit repas.
Was she special? Did she consider herself special?
Oh, gosh, she didn’t know. In the history of the
world many had been more special than her. Helen
Keller had been awesome; Mother Teresa was
amazing; Mrs. Roosevelt was quite chipper in spite
of her husband, who was handicapped, which, in
addition, she had been gay, with those big old
teeth, long before such time as being gay and First
Lady was even conceptual. She, Alison, could not
hope to compete in the category of those ladies.
Not yet, anyway!
There was so much she didn’t know! Like how to
change the oil. Or even check the oil. How to open
the hood. How to bake brownies. That was
embarrassing, actually, being a girl and all. And
what was a mortgage? Did it come with the house?
When you breast-fed, did you have to like push the
milk out?
Egads. Who was this wan figure, visible through the
living-room window, trotting up Gladsong Drive?
Kyle Boot, palest kid in all the land? Still dressed in
his weird cross-country-running toggles?
Poor thing. He looked like a skeleton with a mullet.
Were those cross-country shorts from the like
“Charlie’s Angels” days or quoi? How could he run
so well when he seemed to have literally no
muscles? Every day he ran home like this, shirtless
with his backpack on, then hit the remote from
down by the Fungs’ and scooted into his garage
without breaking stride.
You almost had to admire the poor goof.
They’d grown up together, been little beaners in
that mutual sandbox down by the creek. Hadn’t
they bathed together when wee or some such
crud? She hoped that never got out. Because in
terms of friends Kyle was basically down to Tasso
Slavko, who walked leaning way backward and was
always retrieving things from between his teeth,
announcing the name of the retrieved thing in
Greek, then re-eating it. Kyle’s mom and dad didn’t
let him do squat. He had to call home if the movie in
World Culture might show bare boobs. Each of the
items in his lunch box was clearly labelled.
Pas de bourrée.
And curtsy.
Pour quantity of Cheez Doodles into
compartmentalized old-school Tupperware dealie.
Thanks, Mom, thanks, Dad. Your kitchen rocks.
Shake Tupperware dealie back and forth like
panning for gold, then offer to some imaginary poor
gathered round.
Please enjoy. Is there anything else I can do for you
folks?
You have already done enough, Alison, by even
deigning to speak to us.
That is so not true! Don’t you understand, all people
deserve respect? Each of us is a rainbow.
Uh, really? Look at this big open sore on my poor
shrivelled flank.
Allow me to fetch you some Vaseline.
That would be much appreciated. This thing kills.
But as far as that rainbow idea? She believed that.
People were amazing. Mom was awesome, Dad
was awesome, her teachers worked so hard and
had kids of their own, and some were even getting
divorced, such as Mrs. Dees, but still always took
time for their students. What she found especially
inspiring about Mrs. Dees was that, even though
Mr. Dees was cheating on Mrs. Dees with the lady
who ran the bowling alley, Mrs. Dees was still
teaching the best course ever in Ethics, posing
such questions as: Can goodness win? Or do good
people always get shafted, evil being more
reckless? That last bit seemed to be Mrs. Dees
taking a shot at the bowling-alley gal. But seriously!
Is life fun or scary? Are people good or bad? On the
one hand, that clip of those gauntish pale bodies
being steamrolled while fat German ladies looked
on chomping gum. On the other hand, sometimes
rural folks, even if their particular farms were on
hills, stayed up late filling sandbags.
In their straw poll she had voted for people being
good and life being fun, with Mrs. Dees giving her a
pitying glance as she stated her views: To do good,
you just have to decide to do good. You have to be
brave. You have to stand up for what’s right. At that
last, Mrs. Dees had made this kind of groan. Which
was fine. Mrs. Dees had a lot of pain in her life, yet,
interestingly? Still obviously found something fun
about life and good about people, because
otherwise why sometimes stay up so late grading
you come in the next day all exhausted, blouse on
backward, having messed it up in the early-morning
dark, you dear discombobulated thing?

Here came a knock on the door. Back door. In-ter-
est-ing. Who could it be? Father Dmitri from across

the way? UPS? FedEx? With un petit check pour
Papa?
Jeté, jeté, rond de jambe.
Pas de bourrée.
Open door, and—
Here was a man she did not know. Quite huge
fellow, in one of those meter-reader vests.
Something told her to step back in, slam the door.
But that seemed rude.
Instead she froze, smiled, did {eyebrow-raise} to
indicate: May I help you?
Kyle Boot dashed through the garage, into the living
area, where the big clocklike wooden indicator was
set at All Out. Other choices included: Mom & Dad
Out; Mom Out; Dad Out; Kyle Out; Mom & Kyle
Out; Dad & Kyle Out; and All In.
Why did they even need All In? Wouldn’t they know
it when they were All In? Would he like to ask Dad
that? Who, in his excellent, totally silent downstairs
woodshop, had designed and built the Family
Status Indicator?
Ha.
Ha ha.
On the kitchen island was a Work Notice.
Scout: New geode on deck.
Place in yard per included
drawing. No goofing. Rake area
first, put down plastic as I have
shown you. Then lay in white
rock. THIS GEODE
EXPENSIVE. Pls take seriously.
No reason this should not be
done by time I get home. This =
five (5) Work Points.

Gar, Dad, do you honestly feel it fair that I should
have to slave in the yard until dark, after a rigorous
cross-country practice that included sixteen 440s,
eight 880s, a mile-for-time, a kajillion Drake sprints,
and a five-mile Indian relay?
Shoes off, mister.
Yoinks, too late. He was already at the TV. And had
left an incriminating trail of micro-clods. Way
verboten. Could the micro-clods be hand-plucked?
Although, problem: if he went back to hand-pluck
the micro-clods, he’d leave an incriminating new
trail of micro-clods.
He took off his shoes and stood mentally
rehearsing a little show he liked to call “WHAT IF . . .
RIGHT NOW?”
WHAT IF they came home RIGHT NOW?
It’s a funny story, Dad! I came in thoughtlessly!
Then realized what I’d done! I guess, when I think
about it, what I’m happy about? Is how quickly I
self-corrected! The reason I came in so
thoughtlessly was, I wanted to get right to work,
Dad, per your note!
He raced in his socks to the garage, threw his
shoes into the garage, ran for the vacuum,
vacuumed up the micro-clods, then realized, holy
golly, he had thrown his shoes into the garage
rather than placing them on the Shoe Sheet as
required, toes facing away from the door for ease of
donnage later.
He stepped into the garage, placed his shoes on
the Shoe Sheet, stepped back inside.
Scout, Dad said in his head, has anyone ever told
you that even the most neatly maintained garage is
going to have some oil on its floor, which is now on
your socks, being tracked all over the tan Berber?
Oh gar, his ass was grass.
But no—_celebrate good times, come on—_no oil
stain on rug.
He tore off his socks. It was absolutely verboten for
him to be in the main living area barefoot. Mom and
Dad coming home to find him Tarzaning around like
some sort of white-trasher would not be the least
fucking bit—
Swearing in your head? Dad said in his head. Step
up, Scout, be a man. If you want to swear, swear
aloud.
I don’t want to swear aloud.
Then don’t swear in your head.
Mom and Dad would be heartsick if they could hear
the swearing he sometimes did in his head, such as
crap-cunt shit-turd dick-in-the-ear butt-creamery.
Why couldn’t he stop doing that? They thought so
highly of him, sending weekly braggy e-mails to
both sets of grandparents, such as: Kyle’s been
super-busy keeping up his grades while running
varsity cross-country though still a sophomore,
while setting aside a little time each day to
manufacture such humdingers as cunt-swoggle
rear-fuck—
What was wrong with him? Why couldn’t he be
grateful for all that Mom and Dad did for him,
instead of—
Cornhole the ear-cunt.

Flake-fuck the pale vestige with a proddering dick-
knee.

You could always clear the mind with a hard pinch
on your own minimal love handle.
Ouch.
Hey, today was Tuesday, a Major Treat day. The
five (5) new Work Points for placing the geode, plus
his existing two (2) Work Points, totalled seven (7)
Work Points, which, added to his eight (8) accrued
Usual Chore Points, made fifteen (15) Total Treat
Points, which could garner him a Major Treat (for
example, two handfuls of yogurt-covered raisins),
plus twenty free-choice TV minutes, although the
particular show would have to be negotiated with
Dad at time of cash-in.
One thing you will not be watching, Scout, is
“America’s Most Outspoken Dirt Bikers.”
Whatever.
Whatever, Dad.
Really, Scout? “Whatever”? Will it be “whatever”
when I take away all your Treat Points and force
you to quit cross-country, as I have several times
threatened to do if a little more cheerful obedience
wasn’t forthcoming?
No, no, no. I don’t want to quit, Dad. Please. I’m
good at it. You’ll see, first meet. Even Matt Drey
said—
Who is Matt Drey? Some ape on the football team?
Yes.
Is his word law?
No.
What did he say?
Little shit can run.
Nice talk, Scout. Ape talk. Anyway, you may not
make it to the first meet. Your ego seems to be
overflowing its banks. And why? Because you can
jog? Anyone can jog. Beasts of the field can jog.
I’m not quitting! Anal-cock shitbird rectum-fritz!
Please, I’m begging you, it’s the only thing I’m
decent at! Mom, if he makes me quit I swear to God
I’ll—
Drama doesn’t suit you, Beloved Only.
If you want the privilege of competing in a team
sport, Scout, show us that you can live within our
perfectly reasonable system of directives designed
to benefit you.
Hello.
A van had just pulled up in the St. Mikhail’s parking
lot.
Kyle walked in a controlled, gentlemanly manner to
the kitchen counter. On the counter was Kyle’s
Traffic Log, which served the dual purpose of (1)
buttressing Dad’s argument that Father Dmitri
should build a soundproof retaining wall and (2)
constituting a data set for a possible Science Fair
project for him, Kyle, entitled, by Dad, “Correlation
of Church Parking Lot Volume vs. Day of Week,
with Ancillary Investigation of Sunday Volume
Throughout Year.”
Smiling agreeably as if he enjoyed filling out the
Log, Kyle very legibly filled out the Log:
Vehicle: VAN.
Color: GRAY.
Make: CHEVY.
Year: UNKNOWN.
A guy got out of the van. One of the usual
Rooskies. “Rooskie” was an allowed slang. Also
“dang it.” Also “holy golly.” Also “crapper.” The
Rooskie was wearing a jean jacket over a hoodie,
which, in Kyle’s experience, was not unusual
church-wear for the Rooskies, who sometimes
came directly over from Jiffy Lube still wearing
coveralls.
Under “Vehicle Driver” he wrote, PROBABLE
PARISHIONER.
That sucked. Stank, rather. The guy being a
stranger, he, Kyle, now had to stay inside until the
stranger left the neighborhood. Which totally futzed
up his geode placing. He’d be out there until
midnight. What a detriment!
The guy put on a DayGlo vest. Ah, dude was a
meter reader.
The meter reader looked left, then right, leaped
across the creek, entered the Pope back yard,
passed between the soccer-ball rebounder and the
in-ground pool, then knocked on the Pope door.
Good leap there, Boris.
The door swung open.
Alison.
Kyle’s heart was singing. He’d always thought that
was just a phrase. Alison was like a national
treasure. In the dictionary under “beauty” there
should be a picture of her in that jean skort.
Although lately she didn’t seem to like him all that
much.
Now she stepped across her deck so the meter
reader could show her something. Something
electrical wrong on the roof? The guy seemed
eager to show her. Actually, he had her by the
wrist. And was like tugging.
That was weird. Wasn’t it? Nothing had ever been
weird around here before. So probably it was fine.
Probably the guy was just a really new meter
reader?
Somehow Kyle felt like stepping out onto the deck.
He stepped out. The guy froze. Alison’s eyes were
scared-horse eyes. The guy cleared his throat,
turned slightly to let Kyle see something.
A knife.
The meter reader had a knife.
Here’s what you’re doing, the guy said. Standing
right there until we leave. Move a muscle, I knife
her in the heart. Swear to God. Got it?
Kyle’s mouth was so spitless all he could do was
make his mouth do the shape it normally did when
saying Yes.
Now they were crossing the yard. Alison threw
herself to the ground. The guy hauled her up. She
threw herself down. He hauled her up. It was odd
seeing Alison tossed like a rag doll in the sanctuary
of the perfect yard her dad had made for her. She
threw herself down.
The guy hissed something and she rose, suddenly
docile.
In his chest Kyle felt the many directives, Major and
Minor, he was right now violating. He was on the
deck shoeless, on the deck shirtless, was outside
when a stranger was near, had engaged with that
stranger.
Last week Sean Ball had brought a wig to school to
more effectively mimic the way Bev Mirren chewed
her hair when nervous. Kyle had briefly considered
intervening. At Evening Meeting, Mom had said that
she considered Kyle’s decision not to intervene
judicious. Dad had said, That was none of your
business. You could have been badly hurt. Mom
had said, Think of all the resources we’ve invested
in you, Beloved Only. Dad had said, I know we
sometimes strike you as strict but you are literally
all we have.
They were at the soccer-ball rebounder now,
Alison’s arm up behind her back. She was making a
low repetitive sound of denial, like she was trying to
invent a noise that would adequately communicate
her feelings about what she’d just this instant
realized was going to happen to her.
He was a kid. There was nothing he could do. In his
chest he felt the lush release of pressure that
always resulted when he submitted to a directive.
There at his feet was the geode. He should just
look at that until they were gone. It was a great one.
Maybe the greatest one ever. The crystals at the
cutaway glistened in the sun. It would look nice in
the yard. Once he’d placed it. He’d place it once
they were gone. Dad would be impressed that even
after what had occurred he’d remembered to place
the geode.
That’s the ticket, Scout.
We are well pleased, Beloved Only.
Super job, Scout.
Holy crap. It was happening. She was marching
along all meek like the trooper he’d known she’d
be. He’d had her in mind since the baptism of
what’s-his-name. Sergei’s kid. At the Russian
church. She’d been standing in her yard, her dad or
some such taking her picture.
He’d been like, Hello, Betty.
Kenny had been like, Little young, bro.
He’d been like, For you, grandpa.
When you studied history, the history of cultures,
you saw your own individual time as hidebound.
There were various theories of acquiescence. In
Bible days a king might ride through a field and go:
That one. And she would be brought unto him. And
they would duly be betrothed and if she gave birth
unto a son, super, bring out the streamers, she was
a keeper. Was she, that first night, digging it?
Probably not. Was she shaking like a leaf? Didn’t
matter. What mattered was offspring and the
furtherance of the lineage. Plus the exaltation of the
king, which resulted in righteous kingly power.
Here was the creek.
He marched her right through.
The following bullet points remained in the decision
matrix: take to side van door, shove in, follow in,
tape wrists/mouth, hook to chain, make speech. He
had the speech down cold. Had practiced it both in
his head and on the recorder: Calm your heart,
darling, I know you’re scared because you don’t
know me yet and didn’t expect this today but give
me a chance and you will see we will fly high. See I
am putting the knife right over here and I don’t
expect I’ll have to use it, right?
If she wouldn’t get in the van, punch hard in gut.
Then pick up, carry to side van door, throw in, tape
wrists/mouth, hook to chain, make speech, etc., etc.
Stop, pause, he said.
Gal stopped.

Fucksake. Side door of the van was locked. How
undisciplined was that. Insuring that the van door

was unlocked was clearly indicated on the pre-
mission matrix. Melvin appeared in his mind. On

Melvin’s face was the look of hot disappointment
that had always preceded an ass-whooping, which
had always preceded the other thing. Put up your
hands, Melvin said, defend yourself.

True, true. Little error there. Should have double-
checked the pre-mission matrix.

No biggie.
Joy not fear.
Melvin was dead fifteen years. Mom dead twelve.
Little bitch was turned around now, looking back at
the house. That willfulness wouldn’t stand. That
was going to get nipped in the bud. He’d have to
remember to hurt her early, establish a baseline.
Turn the fuck around, he said.
She turned around.
He unlocked the door, swung it open. Moment of
truth. If she got in and let him use the tape, they
were home free. He’d picked out a place in Sackett,
big-ass cornfield, dirt road leading in. If fuckwise it
went good they’d pick up the freeway from there.
Basically steal the van. It was Kenny’s van. He’d
borrowed it for the day. Screw Kenny. Kenny had
once called him stupid. Too bad, Kenny, that
remark just cost you one van. If fuckwise it went
bad and she didn’t properly arouse him he’d abort
the activity, truncate the subject, heave the thing
out, clean van as necessary, go buy corn, return
van to Kenny, say, Hey, bro, here’s a shitload of
corn, thanks for the van, I never could’ve bought a
suitable quantity of corn in my car. Then lay low,

watch the papers like he’d done with the non-
arousing redhead out in—

Gal gave him an imploring look, like, Please don’t.
Was this a good time? To give her one in the gut,
knock the wind out of her sails?
It was.
He did.
The geode was beautiful. What a beautiful geode.
What made it beautiful? What were the principal
characteristics of a beautiful geode? Come on,
think. Come on, concentrate.
She’ll recover in time, Beloved Only.
None of our affair, Scout.
We’re amazed by your good judgment, Beloved
Only.
Dimly he noted that Alison had been punched. Eyes
on the geode, he heard the little oof.
His heart dropped at the thought of what he was
letting happen. They’d used goldfish snacks as
coins. They’d made bridges out of rocks. Down by
the creek. Back in the day. Oh God. He should’ve
never stepped outside. Once they were gone he’d
just go back inside, pretend he’d never stepped out,
make the model-railroad town, still be making it
when Mom and Dad got home. When eventually
someone told him about it? He’d make a certain
face. Already on his face he could feel the face he
would make, like, What? Alison? Raped? Killed?
Oh God. Raped and killed while I innocently made
my railroad town, sitting cross-legged and unaware
on the floor like a tiny little—
No. No, no, no. They’d be gone soon. Then he
could go inside. Call 911. Although then everyone
would know he’d done nothing. All his future life
would be bad. Forever he’d be the guy who’d done
nothing. Besides, calling wouldn’t do any good.
They’d be long gone. The Parkway was just across
Featherstone, with like a million arteries and
cloverleafs or whatever sprouting out of it. So that
was that. In he’d go. As soon as they left. Leave,
leave, leave, he thought, so I can go inside, forget
this ever—
Then he was running. Across the lawn. Oh God!
What was he doing, what was he doing? Jesus,
shit, the directives he was violating! Running in the
yard (bad for the sod); transporting a geode without
its protective wrapping; hopping the fence, which
stressed the fence, which had cost a pretty penny;
leaving the yard; leaving the yard barefoot; entering
the Secondary Area without permission; entering
the creek barefoot (broken glass, dangerous
microorganisms), and, not only that, oh God,
suddenly he saw what this giddy part of himself
intended, which was to violate a directive so Major
and absolute that it wasn’t even a directive, since
you didn’t need a directive to know how totally
verboten it was to—
He burst out of the creek, the guy still not turning,
and let the geode fly into his head, which seemed
to emit a weird edge-seep of blood even before the
skull visibly indented and the guy sat right on his
ass.
Yes! Score! It was fun! Fun dominating a grownup!
Fun using the most dazzling gazelle-like leg speed
ever seen in the history of mankind to dash
soundlessly across space and master this huge
galoot, who otherwise, right now, would be—
What if he hadn’t?
God, what if he hadn’t?
He imagined the guy bending Alison in two like a
pale garment bag while pulling her hair and
thrusting bluntly, as he, Kyle, sat cowed and
obedient, tiny railroad viaduct grasped in his
pathetic babyish—
Jesus! He skipped over and hurled the geode
through the windshield of the van, which imploded,
producing an inward rain of glass shards that made
the sound of thousands of tiny bamboo wind
chimes.
He scrambled up the hood of the van, retrieved the
geode.
Really? Really? You were going to ruin her life, ruin
my life, you cunt-probe dick-munch ass-gashing

Animal? Who’s bossing who now? Gash-ass, jiz-
lips, turd-munch—

He’d never felt so strong/angry/wild. Who’s the
man? Who’s your daddy? What else must he do?
To insure that Animal did no further harm? You still
moving, freak? Got a plan, stroke-dick? Want a
skull gash on top of your existing skull gash, big
man? You think I won’t? You think I—
Easy, Scout, you’re out of control.
Slow your motor down, Beloved Only.
Quiet. I’m the boss of me.
FUCK!
What the hell? What was he doing on the ground?
Had he tripped? Did someone wonk him? Did a
branch fall? God damn. He touched his head. His
hand came away bloody.
The beanpole kid was bending. To pick something
up. A rock. Why was that kid off his porch? Where
was the knife?
Where was the gal?
Crab-crawling toward the creek.
Flying across her yard.
Going into her house.
Fuck it, everything was fucked. Better hit the road.
With what, his good looks? He had eight bucks
total.
Ah Christ! The kid had smashed the windshield!
With the rock! Kenny was not going to like that one
bit.
He tried to stand but couldn’t. The blood was just
pouring out. He was not going to jail again. No way.
He’d slit his wrists. Where was the knife? He’d stab
himself in the chest. That had nobility. Then the
people would know his name. Which of them had
the balls to samurai themselves with a knife in the
chest?
None.
Nobody.
Go ahead, pussy. Do it.
No. The king does not take his own life. The
superior man silently accepts the mindless rebuke
of the rabble. Waits to rise and fight anew. Plus he
had no idea where the knife was. Well, he didn’t
need it. He’d crawl into the woods, kill something
with his bare hands. Or make a trap from some
grass. Ugh. Was he going to barf? There, he had.
Right on his lap.
Figures you’d blow the simplest thing, Melvin said.
Melvin, God, can’t you see my head is bleeding so
bad?
A kid did it to you. You’re a joke. You got fucked by
a kid.
Oh, sirens, perfect.
Well, it was a sad day for the cops. He’d fight them
hand to hand. He’d sit until the last moment,
watching them draw near, doing a silent death
mantra that would centralize all his life power in his
fists.
He sat thinking about his fists. They were huge
granite boulders. They were a pit bull each. He tried
to get up. Somehow his legs weren’t working. He
hoped the cops would get here soon. His head
really hurt. When he touched up there, things
moved. It was like he was wearing a gore-cap. He
was going to need a bunch of stitches. He hoped it
wouldn’t hurt too much. Probably it would, though.
Where was that beanpole kid?
Oh, here he was.
Looming over him, blocking out the sun, rock held
high, yelling something, but he couldn’t tell what,
because of the ringing in his ears.
Then he saw that the kid was going to bring the
rock down. He closed his eyes and waited and was
not at peace at all but instead felt the beginnings of
a terrible dread welling up inside him, and if that
dread kept growing at the current rate, he realized
in a flash of insight, there was a name for the place
he would be then, and it was Hell.
Alison stood at the kitchen window. She’d peed
herself. Which was fine. People did that. When
super-scared. She’d noticed it while making the
call. Her hands had been shaking so bad. They still
were. One leg was doing the Thumper thing. God,
the things he’d said to her. He’d punched her. He’d
pinched her. The mark on her arm was black. How
could Kyle still be out there? But there he was, in
those comical shorts, so confident he was goofing
around, hands clenched over his head like a boxer
from some cute alt universe where a kid that skinny
could actually win a fight against a guy with a knife.
Wait.
His hands weren’t clenched. He was holding the
rock, shouting something down at the guy, who was
on his knees, like the blindfolded Chinese fellow in
that video they’d seen in History, about to get
sword-killed by a formal dude in a helmet.
Kyle, don’t, she whispered.
For months afterward she had nightmares in which
Kyle brought the rock down. She was on the deck
trying to scream his name but nothing was coming
out. Down came the rock. Then the guy had no
head. The blow just literally dissolved his head.
Then his body tumped over and Kyle turned to her
with this heartbroken look of, My life is over. I have
killed a guy.
Why was it, she sometimes wondered, that in
dreams we can’t do the simplest things? Like a
crying puppy is standing on some broken glass and
you want to pick it up and brush the shards off its
pads but you can’t because you’re balancing a ball
on your head. Or you’re driving and there’s this old
guy on crutches, and you go, to Mr. Feder, your
Driver’s Ed teacher, Should I swerve? And he’s like,
Uh, probably. But then you hear this big clunk and
Feder makes a negative mark in his book.
Sometimes she’d wake up crying from the dream
about Kyle. The last time, Mom and Dad were
already there, going, That’s not how it was.
Remember, Allie? How did it happen? Say it. Say it
out loud. Allie, can you tell Mommy and Daddy how
it really happened?
I ran outside, she said. I shouted.
That’s right, Dad said. You shouted. Shouted like a
champ.
And what did Kyle do? Mom said.
Put down the rock, she said.
A bad thing happened to you kids, Dad said. But it
could have been worse.
So much worse, Mom said.
But because of you kids, Dad said, it wasn’t.
You did so good, Mom said.
Did beautiful, Dad said.