Title: The Private History of a Campaign That Failed
Author: Mark Twain

You have heard from a great many people who did something in the
war, is it not fair and right that you listen a little moment to
one who started out to do something in it but didn't? Thousands
entered the war, got just a taste of it, and then stepped out
again permanently. These, by their very numbers, are respectable
and therefore entitled to a sort of voice, not a loud one, but a
modest one, not a boastful one but an apologetic one. They ought
not be allowed much space among better people, people who did
something. I grant that, but they ought at least be allowed to
state why they didn't do anything and also to explain the process
by which they didn't do anything. Surely this kind of light must
have some sort of value.
Out west there was a good deal of confusion in men's minds during
the first months of the great trouble, a good deal of
unsettledness, of leaning first this way then that, and then the
other way. It was hard for us to get our bearings. I call to mind
an example of this. I was piloting on the Mississippi when the
news came that South Carolina had gone out of the Union on the
20th of December, 1860. My pilot mate was a New Yorker. He was
strong for the Union; so was I. But he would not listen to me
with any patience, my loyalty was smirched, to his eye, because my
father had owned slaves. I said in palliation of this dark fact
that I had heard my father say, some years before he died, that
slavery was a great wrong and he would free the solitary Negro he
then owned if he could think it right to give away the property
of the family when he was so straitened in means. My mate
retorted that a mere impulse was nothing, anyone could pretend to
a good impulse, and went on decrying my Unionism and libelling my
ancestry. A month later the secession atmosphere had
considerably thickened on the Lower Mississippi and I became a
rebel; so did he. We were together in New Orleans the 26th of
January, when Louisiana went out of the Union. He did his fair
share of the rebel shouting but was opposed to letting me do
mine. He said I came of bad stock, of a father who had been
willing to set slaves free. In the following summer he was
piloting a Union gunboat and shouting for the Union again and I
was in the Confederate army. I held his note for some borrowed
money. He was one of the most upright men I ever knew but he
repudiated that note without hesitation because I was a rebel and
the son of a man who owned slaves.
In that summer of 1861 the first wash of the wave of war broke
upon the shores of Missouri. Our state was invaded by the Union
forces. They took possession of St. Louis, Jefferson Barracks,
and some other points. The governor, Calib Jackson, issued his
proclamation calling out fifty thousand militia to repel the
invader.
I was visiting in the small town where my boyhood had been spent,
Hannibal, Marion County. Several of us got together in a secret
place by night and formed ourselves into a military company. One
Tom Lyman, a young fellow of a good deal of spirit but of no
military experience, was made captain; I was made second
lieutenant. We had no first lieutenant, I do not know why, it was
so long ago. There were fifteen of us. By the advice of an
innocent connected with the organization we called ourselves the
Marion Rangers. I do not remember that anyone found fault with
the name. I did not, I thought it sounded quite well. The young
fellow who proposed this title was perhaps a fair sample of the
kind of stuff we were made of. He was young, ignorant, good natured,
well meaning, trivial, full of romance, and given to reading
chivalric novels and singing forlorn love ditties. He had some
pathetic little nickel plated aristocratic instincts and detested
his name, which was Dunlap, detested it partly because it was
nearly as common in that region as Smith but mainly because it
had a plebian sound to his ears. So he tried to ennoble it by
writing it in this way; d'Unlap. That contented his eye but left
his ear unsatisfied, for people gave the new name the same old
pronunciation, emphasis on the front end of it. He then did the
bravest thing that can be imagined, a thing to make one shiver
when one remembers how the world is given to resenting shams and
affectations, he began to write his name so; d'Un'Lap. And he
waited patiently through the long storm of mud that was flung at
his work of art and he had his reward at last, for he lived to
see that name accepted and the emphasis put where he wanted it
put by people who had known him all his life, and to whom the
tribe of Dunlaps had been as familiar as the rain and the
sunshine for forty years. So sure of victory at last is the
courage that can wait. He said he had found by consulting some
ancient French chronicles that the name was rightly and
originally written d'Un'Lap and said that if it were translated
into English it would mean Peterson, Lap, Latin or Greek, he
said, for stone or rock, same as the French pierre, that is to
say, Peter, d' of or from, un, a or one, hence d'Un'Lap, of or
from a stone or a Peter, that is to say, one who is the son of a
stone, the son of a peter, Peterson. Our militia company were not
learned and the explanation confused them, so they called him
Peterson Dunlap. He proved useful to us in his way, he named our
camps for us and generally struck a name that was "no slouch" as
the boys said.
That is one sample of us. Another was Ed Stevens, son of the town
jeweller, trim built, handsome, graceful, neat as a cat, bright,
educated, but given over entirely to fun. There was nothing
serious in life to him. As far as he was concerned, this military
expedition of ours was simply a holiday. I should say about half
of us looked upon it in much the same way, not consciously
perhaps, but unconsciously. We did not think, we were not capable
of it. As for myself, I was full of unreasoning joy to be done
with turning out of bed at midnight and four in the morning, for
a while grateful to have a change, new scenes, new occupations, a
new interest. In my thoughts that was as far as I went. I did not
go into the details, as a rule, one doesn't at twenty four.
Another sample was Smith, the blacksmith's apprentice. This vast
donkey had some pluck, of a slow and sluggish nature, but a soft
heart. At one time he would knock a horse down fro some
impropriety and at another he would get homesick and cry.
However, he had one ultimate credit to his account which some of
us hadn't. He stuck to the war and was killed in battle at last.
Joe Bowers, another sample, was a huge, good natured, flax headed
lubber, lazy, sentimental, full of harmless brag, a grumbler by
nature, an experience and industrious ambitious and often quite
picturesque liar, and yet not a successful one for he had no
intelligent training but was allowed to come up just anyways.
This life was serious enough to him, and seldom satisfactory. But
he was a good fellow anyway and the boys all liked him. He was
made orderly sergeant, Stevens was made corporal.
These samples will answer and they are quite fair ones. Well, this
herd of cattle started for the war. What could you expect of
them? They did as well as they knew how, but really, what was
justly expected of them? Nothing I should say. And that is what
they did.
We waited for a dark night, for caution and secrecy were
necessary, then toward midnight we stole in couples and from
various directions to the Griggith place beyond town. From that
place we set out together on foot. Hannibal lies at the extreme
south eastern corner of Marion County, on the Mississippi river.
Our objective point was the hamlet of New London, ten miles away
in Ralls County.
The first hour was all fun, all idle nonsense and laughter. But
that could not be kept up. The steady drudging became like work,
the play had somehow oozed out of it, the stillness of the woods
and the sombreness of the night began to throw a depressing
influence over the spirits of the boys and presently the talking
died out and each person shut himself up in his own thoughts.
During the last half of the second hour nobody said a word.
Now we approached a log farmhouse where, according to reports,
there was a guard of five Union soldiers. Lyman called a halt,
and there, in the deep gloom of the overhanging branches, he
began to whisper a plan of assault upon the house, which made the
gloom more depressing than it was before. We realized with a cold
suddenness that here was no jest--we were standing face to face
with actual war. We were equal to the occasion. In our response
there was no hesitation, no indecision. We said that if Lyman
wanted to meddle with those soldiers he could go ahead and do it,
but if he waited for us to follow him he would wait a long time.
Lyman urged, pleaded, tried to shame us into it, but it had no
effect. Our course was plain in our minds, our minds were made
up. We would flank the farmhouse, go out around. And that was
what we did.
We struck into the woods and entered upon a rough time, stumbling
over roots, getting tangled in vines and torn by briers. At last
we reached an open place in a safe region and we sat down, blown
and hot, to cool off and nurse our scratches and bruises. Lyman
was annoyed but the rest of us were cheerful. We had flanked the
farmhouse. We had made our first military movement and it was a
success. We had nothing to fret about, we were feeling just the
other way. Horse paly and laughing began again. The expedition
had become a holiday frolic once more.
Then we had two more hours of dull trudging and ultimate silence
and depression. Then about dawn, we straggled into New London,
soiled, heel blistered, fagged with out little march, and all of
us, except Stevens, in a sour and raspy humour and privately down
on the war. We stacked our shabby old shotguns in Colonel Ralls's
barn and then went in a body and breakfasted with that veteran of
the mexican war. Afterward he took us to a distant meadow, and
there, in the shade of a tree, we listened to an old fashioned
speech from him, full of gunpowder and glory, full of that
adjective piling, mixed metaphor and windy declamation which was
regraded as eloquence in that ancient time and region and then he
swore on a bible to be faithful to the State of Missouri and
drive all invaders from her soil no matter whence they may come
or under what flag they might march. This mixed us considerably
and we could not just make out what service we were involved
in, but Colonel Ralls, the practised politician and phrase
juggler, was not similarly in doubt. He knew quite clearly he
had invested us in the cause of the Southern Confederacy. He
closed the solemnities by belting around me the sword which his
neighbour, Colonel brown, had worn at Beuna Vista and Molino del
Ray and he accompanied this act with another impressive blast.
Then we formed in line of battle and marched four hours to a
shady and pleasant piece of woods on the border of a far reaching
expanse of a flowery prairie. It was an enchanting region for war,
our kind of war.
We pierced the forest about half a mile and took up a strong
position with some low and rocky hills behind us, and a purling
limpid creek in front. Straightaway half the command was in
swimming and the other half fishing. The ass with the french name
gave the position a romantic title but it was too long so the
boys shortened and simplified it to Camp Ralls.
We occupied an old maple sugar camp whose half rotted troughs
were still propped against the trees. A long corn crib served fro
sleeping quarters fro the battalion. On our left, half a mile
away, were Mason's farm and house, and he was a friend to the
cause. Shortly after noon the farmers began to arrive from
several different directions with mules and horses for our use,
and these they lent us for as long as the war might last, which,
they judged, might be about three months. The animals were of all
sizes all colours and all breeds. They were mainly young and
frisky and nobody in the command could stay on them long at a
time, for we were town boys and ignorant of horsemanship. The
creature that fell to my share was a very small mule, and yet so
quick and active he could throw me off without difficulty and it
did this whenever I got on. Then it would bray, stretching its
neck out, laying its ears back and spreading its jaws till you
could see down to its works. If I took it by the bridle and tried
to lead it off the grounds it would sit down and brace back and
no one could ever budge it. However, I was not entirely destitute
of military resources and I did presently manage to spoil this
game, for I had seen many a steamboat aground in my time and knew
a trick or two which even a grounded mule would be obliged to
respect. There was a well by the corn crib so I substituted
thirty fathom of rope for the bridle and fetched him home with
the windlass.
I will anticipate here sufficiently to say that we did learn to
ride after some days' practice, but never well. We could not
learn to like our animals. They were not choice ones and most of
them had annoying peculiarities of one kind or another. Stevens's
horse would carry him, when he was not noticing, under the huge
excrescences which for on the trunks of oak trees and wipe him out
of the saddle this way. Stevens got several bad hurts. Sergeant
Bowers's horse was very large and tall, slim with long legs, and
looked like a railroad bridge. His size enabled him to reach all
about, and as far as he wanted to go, so he was always biting
Bowers's legs. On the march, in the sun, Bowers slept a good deal
and as soon as the horse recognized he was asleep he would reach
around and bite him on the leg. His legs were black and blue with
bites. This was the only thing that could make him swear, but
this always did, whenever his horse bit him he swore, and of
course, Stevens, who laughed at everything, laughed at this and
would get into such convulsions over it as to lose his balance
and fall off his horse, and then Bowers, already irritated by the
pain of the horse bite, would resent the laughter with hard
language, and there would be a quarrel so that horse made no end
of trouble and bad blood in the command.
However, I will get back to where I was, our first afternoon in
the sugar camp. The sugar troughs came very handy as horse
troughs and we had plenty of corn to fill them with. I ordered
Sergeant Bowers to feed my mule, but he said that if I reckoned
he went to war to be a dry nurse to a mule it wouldn't take me
very long to find out my mistake. I believed that this was
insubordination but I was full of uncertainties about everything
military so I let the matter pass and went and ordered Smith,
the blacksmith's apprentice, to feed the mule, but he merely gave
me a large, cold, sarcastic grin, such as an ostensibly seven
year old horse gives you when you lift up his lip and find he is
fourteen, and turned his back on me. I then went to the captain
and asked if it were not right and proper and military for me to
have an orderly. He said it was, but as there was only one
orderly in the corps, it was but right he himself should have
Bowers on his staff. Bowers said he wouldn't serve on anyone's
staff and if anybody thought he could make him, let him try. So,
of course, the matter had to be dropped, there was no other way.
Next, nobody would cook. It was considered a degradation so we
had no dinner. We lazed the rest of the pleasant afternoon away,
some dozing under trees, some smoking cob pipes and talking
sweethearts and war, others playing games. By late supper time
all hands were famished and to meet the difficulty, all hands
turned to on an equal footing, and gathered wood, built fires,
and cooked the evening meal. Afterward everything was smooth for
a while then trouble broke out between the corporal and the
sergeant, each claiming to rank the other. Nobody knew which was
the higher office so Lyman had to settle the matter by making the
rank of both officers equal. The commander of an ignorant crew
like that has many troubles and vexations which probably do not
occur in the regular army at all. However, with the song singing
and yarn spinning around the campfire everything presently became
serene again, and by and by we raked the corn down one level in
one end of the crib and all went to bed on it, tying a horse to
the door so he would neigh if anyone tried to get in. (it was
always my impression that was always what the horse was
there for and I know it was the impression of at least one other
of the command, for we talked about it at the time and admired
the military ingenuity of the device, but when I was out west
three years ago, I was told by Mr. A. G. Fuqua, a member of our
company, that the horse was his, that the tying him at the door
was a mere matter of forgetfulness and that to attribute it to
intelligent invention was to give him quite too much credit. In
support of his position, he called my attention to the suggestive
fact that the artifice was not employed again. I had not thought
of that before.)
We had some horsemanship drill every forenoon, then, afternoons,
we rode off here and there in squads a few miles and visited the
farmer's girls and had a youthful good time and got an honest
dinner or supper, and then home again to camp, happy and
content.
For a time, life was idly delicious. It was perfect. There was no
war to mar it. Then came some farmers with an alarm one day. They
said it was rumoured that the enemy were advancing in our
direction from over Hyde's prairie. The result was a sharp stir
among us and general consternation. Ir was a rude awakening from
out pleasant trance. The rumour was but a rumour, nothing definite
about it, so in the confusion we did not know which way to
retreat. Lyman was not for retreating at all in these uncertain
circumstances but he found that if he tried to maintain that
attitude he would fare badly, for the command were in no humour
to put up with insubordination. SO he yielded the point and
called a council of war, to consist of himself and three other
officers, but the privates made such a fuss about being left out
we had to allow them to remain, for they were already present and
doing most of the talking too. The question was, which way to
retreat; but all were so flurried that nobody even seemed to have
even a guess to offer. Except Lyman. He explained in a few calm
words, that inasmuch as the enemy were approaching from over
Hyde's prairie our course was simple. All we had to do was not
retreat toward him, another direction would suit our purposes
perfectly. Everybody saw in a moment how true this was and how
wise, so Lyman got a great many compliments. It was now decide
that we should fall back on Mason's farm.
It was after dark by this time and as we could not know how soon
the enemy might arrive, it did not seem best to try to take the
horses and things with us, so we only took the guns and
ammunition, and started at once. The route was very rough and
hilly and rocky, and presently the night grew very black and rain
began to fall, so we had a troublesome time of it, struggling and
stumbling along in the dark and soon some person slipped and fell,
and then the next person behind stumbled over him and fell, and so
did the rest, one after the other, and then Bowers came along
with the keg of powder in his arms, while the command were all
mixed together, arms and legs on the muddy slope, and so he fell,
of course, with the keg and this started the whole detachment
down the hill in a body and they landed in a brook at the bottom
in a pile and each that was undermost was pulling the hair,
scratching and biting those that were on top of him and those
that were being scratched and bitten scratching and biting the
rest in their turn, and all saying they would die before they
would ever go to war again if they ever got out of this brook this
time and the invader might rot for all they cared, and the
country along with him, and all such talk as that which was
dismal to hear and take part in, in such smothered, low voices,
and such a grisly dark place and so wet, and the enemy, maybe,
coming along at any moment.
The keg of powder was lost, and the guns too; so the growling and
complaining continued straight along while the brigade pawed
around the pasty hill side and slopped around in the brook hunting
for these things; consequently we lost considerable time at this,
and then we heard a sound and held our breath and listened, and
it seemed to be the enemy coming, though it could have been a
cow, for it had a cough like a cow, but we did not wait but left
a couple of guns behind and struck out for Mason's again as
briskly as we could scramble along in the dark. But we got lost
presently in among the rugged little ravines and wasted a deal of
time finding the way again so it was after nine when we reached
Mason's stile at last; and then before we could open our mouths
to give the countersign several dogs came bounding over the fence
with a great riot and noise, and each of them took a soldier by
the slack of his trousers and began to back away with him. We
could not shoot the dogs without endangering the persons they
were attached to so we had to look on helpless at what was
perhaps the most mortifying spectacle of the Civil War. There was
light enough and to spare, for the Mason's had now run out on the
porch with candles in tier hands. The old man and his son came
and undid the dogs without difficulty, all but Bowers's; but they
couldn't undo his dog, they didn't know his combination, he was
of the bull kind and seemed to be set with a Yale time-lock, but
they got him loose at last with some scalding water, of which
Boweres got his share and returned thanks. Peterson Dunlap
afterwards made up a fine name for this engagement and also for
the night march which preceded it but both have long ago faded
out of my memory.
We now went into the house and they began to ask us a world of
questions, whereby it presently came out that we did not know
anything concerning who or what we were running from; so the old
gentleman made himself very frank and said we were a curious
breed of soldiers and guessed we could be depended on to end up
the war in time, because the no governor could afford the expense
of the shoe leather we should cost it trying to follow us around.
"Marion Rangers! Good name, b'gosh," said he. And wanted to why
we hadn't had a picket guard at the place where the road entered
the prairie, and why we hadn't sent out a scouting party to spy
out the enemy and bring us an account of his strength, and so on,
before jumping up and stampeding out of a strong position upon a
mere vague rumour, and so on and so forth, till he made us all
feel shabbier than the dogs had done, not so half enthusiastically
welcome. So we went to bed shamed and low spirited, except
Stevens. Soon Stevens began to devise a garment for Bowers which
could be made to automatically display his battle scars to the
grateful or conceal them from the envious, according to his
occasions, but Bowers was in no humour for this, so there was a
fight and when it was over Stevens had some battle scars of his
own to think about.
Then we got a little sleep. But after all we had gone through,
our activities were not over for the night, for about two o'clock
in the morning we heard a shout of warning from down the lane,
accompanied by a chorus from all the dogs, and in a moment
everybody was up and flying around to find out what the alarm was
about. The alarmist was a horseman who gave notice that a
detachment of Union soldiers was on its way from Hannibal with
orders to capture and hang any bands like our which it could
find. Farmer Mason was in a flurry this time himself. He hurried
us out of the house with all haste, and sent one of his negroes
with us to show us where to hide ourselves and our telltale guns
among the ravines half a mile away,. It was raining heavily.
We struck down the lane, then across some rocky pasture land
which offered good advantages fro stumbling; consequently we were
down in the mud most of the time, and every time a man went down
he black guarded the war and everybody connected with it, and
gave himself the master dose of all for being so foolish as to go
into it. At last we reached the wooded mouth of a ravine, and
there we huddled ourselves under the streaming trees and sent the
negro back home. It was a dismal and heart breaking time. We were
like to e drowned with the rain, deafened with the howling wind
and the booming thunder, and blinded by the lightning. It was
indeed a wild night. The drenching we were getting was misery
enough, but a deeper misery still was the reflection that the
halter might end us before we were a day older. A death of this
shameful sort had not occurred to us as being among the
possibilities of war. It took the romance all out of the campaign
and turned our dreams of glory into a repulsive nightmare. As for
doubting that so barbarous an order had been given, not one of us
did that.
The long night wore itself out at last, and then the Negro came
to us with the news that the alarm had manifestly been a false one
and that breakfast would soon be ready. Straightaway we were
light-hearted again and the world was bright and full of life, as
full of hope and promise as ever; for we were young then. How
long ago that was! Twenty four years.
The mongrel child of philology named the night's refuge Camp
Devastation and no soul objected. The Masons gave us a Missouri
country breakfast in Missourian abundance, and we needed it. Hot
biscuits, hot wheat bread, prettily crossed in a lattice pattern
on top, hot corn pone, fried chicken, bacon, coffee, eggs, milk,
buttermilk etc. and the world may be confidently challenged to
furnish the equal of such a breakfast, as it is cooked in the
South.
We stayed several days at Mason's and after all these years the
memory of the stillness and dullness and lifelessness of that
slumberous farmhouse still oppresses my spirit as with a sense of
the presence of death and mourning. There was nothing to do.
Nothing to think about. There was no interest in life. The male
part of the household were away in the fields all day, the women
were busy and out of our sight, There was no sound but the
plaintive wailing of a spinning wheel forever moaning out from some
distant room, the most lonesome sound in nature, a sound steeped
and sodden with homesickness and the emptiness of life. The
family went to bed about dark every night and as we were not invited
to intrude any new customs we naturally followed theirs. Those
nights were a hundred years long to youths accustomed to being up
till twelve. We lay awake and miserable till that hour ovariotomy
and grew old and decrepit waiting through the still eternities
for the clock strikes. This was no place for town boys. So at
last it was with something very like joy that we received word
that the enemy were on out track again. With a new birth of the
old warrior spirit, we sprang to our places in line of battle and
fell back on Camp Ralls.
Captain Lyman had taken a hint from Mason's talk, and he now gave
orders that our camp should be guarded from surprise by the
posting of pickets. I was ordered to place a picket at the forks
of the road in Hyde's prairie. Night shut down black and
threatening. I told Sergeant Bowers to out to that place and stay
till midnight, and, just as I was expecting, he said he wouldn't
do it. I tried to get others to go but all refused. Some excused
themselves on account of the weather, but the rest were frank
enough to say they wouldn't go in any kind of weather. This kind
of thing sounds odd now, and impossible, but there was no surprise
in it at the time. On the contrary, it seemed a perfectly natural
thing to do. There were scores of little camps scattered over
missouri where the same thing was happening. These camps were
composed of young men who had been born and reared to a sturdy
independence and who did not know what it meant to be ordered
around by Tom, Dick, and Harry, who they had known familiarly all
their lives in the village or the farm. It is quite within the
probabilities that this same thing was happening all over the
South. James Redpath recognized the justice of this assumption
and furnished the following instance in support of it. During a
short stay in East Tennessee he was in a citizen colonel'
s tent one day talking, when a big private appeared at the door
and, without salute or other circumlocution, said to the colonel;
"Say, Jim, I'm a goin' home for a few days."
"What for?"
"Well, I hain't b'en there for a right smart while and I'd like
to see how things is comin' on."
"How long are you gonna be gone?"
"Bout two weeks."
"Well, don't be gone longer than that and get back sooner if you
can."
That was all, and the citizen officer resumed his conversation
where the private had broken it off. This was in the first months
of the war of course. The camps in our part of Missouri were
under Brigadier-General Thomas H. Harris. He was a townsman of
ours, a first rate fellow and well liked, but we had all
familiarly known him as the soles and modest-salaried operator in
the telegraph office, where he had to send about one despatch a
week in ordinary times and two when there was a rush of business.
Consequently, when he appeared in our midst one day on the wing,
and delivered a military command of some sort in a large military
fashion, nobody was surprised at the response which he got from
the assembled soldiery.
"Oh, now what'll you take to don't, Tom Harris?"
It was quite the natural thing. One might justly imagine that we
were hopeless material for the war. And so we seemed in our
ignorant state, but there were those among us who afterward
learned the grim trade, learned to obey like machines, became
valuable soldiers, fought all through the war, and came out at
the end with excellent records. One of the very boys who refused
to go out on picket duty that night and called me an ass for
thinking he would expose himself to danger in such a foolhardy
way, had become distinguished for intrepidity before he was a
year older.
I did secure my picket that might, not by authority but by
diplomacy. I got Bowers to go by agreeing to exchange ranks with
him for the time being and go along and stand the watch with him
as his subordinate. We stayed out there a couple of dreary hours
in the pitchy darkness and the rain, with nothing to modify the
dreariness but Bower's monotonous growling at the war and the
weather, then we began to nod and presently found it next to
impossible to stay in the saddle, so we gave up the tedious job
and went back to the camp without interruption or objection from
anybody and the enemy could have done the same, for there were no
sentries. Everybody was asleep, at midnight there was nobody to
send out another picket so none was sent. We never tried to
establish a watch at night again, as far as I remember, but we
generally kept a picket out in the daytime.
In that camp the whole command slept on the corn in the big corn
crib and there was usually a general row before morning, for the
place was full of rats and they would scramble over the boys' 
bodies and faces, annoying and irritating everybody, and now and 
then they would bite someone's toe, and the person who owned the 
toe would start up and magnify his english and begin to throw corn 
in the dark. The ears were half as heavy as bricks and when they
struck they hurt. The persons struck would respond and inside of 
five minutes everyman would be locked in a death grip with his
neighbour. There was a grievous deal of blood shed in the corn crib
but this was all that was spilt while I was in the war. No, that
is not quite true. But for one circumstance it would have been all.
Our scares were frequent. Every few days rumours would come that
the enemy were approaching. In these cases we always fell back on
some other camp of ours; we never stayed where we were. But the
rumours always turned out to be false, so at last we even began
to grow indifferent to them. One night a negro was sent to our
corn crib with the same old warning, the enemy was hovering in
our neighbourhood. We all said let him hover. We resolved to stay
still and be comfortable. It was a fine warlike resolution, and
no doubt we all felt the stir of it in our veins--for a moment.
We had been having a very jolly time, that was full of horseplay 
and schoolboy hilarity, but that cooled down and presently the 
fast waning fire of forced jokes and forced laughs died out
altogether and the company became silent. Silent and nervous.
And soon uneasy--worried and apprehensive. We had said we would
stay and we were committed. We could have been persuaded to go
but there was nobody brave enough to suggest it. An almost
noiseless movement began in the dark by a general but unvoiced
impulse. When the movement was completed, each man knew that he
was not the only person who had crept to the front wall and had
his eye at a crack between the logs. No, we were all there, all
there with our hearts in our throats and staring out towards the 
sugar-troughs where the forest footpath came through. It was 
late and there was a deep woodsy stillness everywhere. There
was a veiled moonlight which was only just strong enough to
enable us to mark the general shapes of objects. Presently a 
muffled sound caught our ears and we recognized the hoof-beats
of a horse or horses. And right away, a figure appeared in the
forest path; it could have been made of smoke, its mass had such
little sharpness of outline. It was a man on horseback, and it
seemed to me that there were others behind him. I got a hold of
a gun in the dark, and pushed it through a crack between the logs,
hardly knowing what I was doing, I was so dazed with fright.
Somebody said "Fire!" I pulled the trigger, I seemed to see a 
hundred flashes and a hundred reports, then I saw the man fall
down out of the saddle. My first feeling was of surprised
gratification; my first impulse was an apprentice-sportsman's 
impulse to run and pick up his game. Somebody said, hardly 
audibly, "Good, we've got him. Wait for the rest!" But the rest
did not come. There was not a sound, not the whisper of a leaf;
just the perfect stillness, an uncanny kind of stillness which
was all the more uncanny on account of the damp, earthy, 
late night smells now rising and pervading it. Then, wondering, we
crept out stealthily and approached the man. When we got to him,
the moon revealed him distinctly. He was laying on his back with
his arms abroad, his mouth was open and his chest was heaving
with long gasps, and his white shirt front was splashed with 
blood. The thought shot through me that I was a murderer, that
I had killed a man, a man who had never done me any harm. That 
was the coldest sensation that ever went through my marrow. I
was down by him in a moment, helplessly stroking his forehead, 
and I would have given anything then, my own life freely, to 
make him again what he had been five minutes before. And all
the boys seemed to be feeling the same way; they hung over him,
full of pitying interest, and tried all they could to help him,
and said all sorts of regretful things. They had forgotten all
about the enemy, they thought only of this one forlorn unit of
the foe. Once my imagination persuaded me that the dying man 
gave me a reproachful look out of the shadow of his eyes, and it
seemed to me that I could rather that he had stabbed me than he
had done that. He muttered and mumbled like a dreamer in his
sleep about his wife and his child, and, I thought with a new
despair, "This thing that I have done does not end with him; it
falls upon them too, and they never did me any harm, any more
than he."
In a little while the man was dead. He was killed in war, killed
in fair and legitimate war, killed in battles as you may say, and
yet he was as sincerely mourned by the opposing force as if he had
been their brother. The boys stood there a half-hour sorrowing
over him and recalling the details of the tragedy, and wondering
who he might be and if he was a spy, and saying if they had it to
do over again, they would not hurt him unless he attacked them first.
It soon turned out that mine was not the only shot fired; there
were five others, a division of the guilt which was a great relief
to me since it in some degree lightened and diminished the burden
I was carrying. There were six shots fired at once but I was not in
my right mind at the time, and my heated imagination had magnified
my one shot into a volley.
The mans was not in uniform and was not armed. He was a stranger in 
the country, that was all we ever found out about him. The thought of
hi got to preying on me every night, I could not get rid of it. I
could not drive it away, the taking of that unoffending life seemed
such a wanton thing. And it seemed an epitome of war, that all war
must just be the killing of strangers against whom you feel no
personal animosity, strangers who in other circumstances you would
help if you found them in trouble, and who would help you if you
needed it. My campaign was spoiled. It seemed to me that I was not
rightly equipped for this awful business, that war was intended for
men and I for a child's nurse. I resolved to retire from this
avocation of sham soldier-ship while I could retain some remanent of
my self-respect. These morbid thoughts clung to me against reason,
for at the bottom I did not believe I had touched this man. The law
of probabilities decreed me guiltless of his blood for in all my
small experiences with guns, I had not hit anything I had tried to 
hit, and I knew I had done my best to hit him. Yet there was no
solace in the thought. Against a diseased imagination, demonstration
goes for nothing.
The rest of my war experience was of a piece with what I have already
told of it. We kept monotonously falling back upon one camp or
another and eating up the farmers and their families. They ought to
have shot us; on the contrary they were as hospitably kind and
courteous to us as if we had deserved it. In one of these camps we
found Ab Grimes, an upper Mississippi pilot who afterwards became
famous as a daredevil rebel spy, whose career bristled with desperate
adventures. The loom and style of his comrades suggested that they had 
not come into the war to play and their deeds made good the conjecture
later. They were fine horsemen and good revolver shots, but their 
favourite arm was the lasso. Each had one at his pommel, and could
snatch a man out of his saddle with it ovariotomy, on a full gallop, at
any reasonable distance.
In another camp, the chief was a fierce and profane old black-smith
of sixty and he had furnished his twenty recruits with gigantic, 
home-made bowie-knives, to be swung with two hands like the machetes
of the Isthmus. It was a grisly spectacle to see that earnest band 
practising their murderous cuts and slashes under the eye of that
remorseless old fanatic.
The last camp which we fell back on was in a hollow near the village
of Florida where I was born, in Monroe County. Here we were warned
one day that a Union Colonel was sweeping down on us with a whole
regiment at his heels. This looked decidedly serious. Our boys went
apart and consulted; then we went back and told the other companies
present that the war was a disappointment to us and we were going to
disband. They were getting ready themselves to fall back on some place
or another, and we were only waiting for General Tom Harris, who was
expected to arrive at any moment, so they tried to persuade us to
wait a little while but the majority of us said no, we were accustomed 
to falling back and didn't need any of Harris's help, we could get
along perfectly without him and save time too. So, about half of our
fifteen men, including myself, mounted, and left on the instant; the
others yielded to persuasion, and stayed--stayed through the war.
An hour later we met General Harris on the road, with two or three
people in his company, his staff probably, but we could not tell;
none of them were in uniform; uniforms had not come into vogue among
us yet.  Harris ordered us back, but we told him there was a Union
colonel coming with a whole regiment in his wake and it looked as if
there was going to be a disturbance, so we had concluded to go home.
He raged a little bit, but it was of no use, our minds were made up.
We had done our share, killed one man, exterminated one army, such
as it was; let him go and kill the rest and that would end the war.
I did not see that brisk young general again until last year; he was
wearing white hair and whiskers.
In time I came to learn that the Union colonel whose coming frightened
me out of the war and crippled the Southern cause to that extent;
General Grant. I came within a few hours of seeing him when he was as 
unknown as I was myself; at a time when anybody could have said, 
"Grant--Ulysses S Grant? I do not remember hearing the name before."
It seems difficult to realize there was once a time when such a 
remark could be rationally made, but there was, I was within a few
miles of the place and the occasion too, though proceeding in the
other direction.
The thoughtful will not throw this war paper of mine lightly aside
as being valueless. It has this value; it is not an unfair picture of
what went on in may a militia camp in the first months of the rebellion,
when the green recruits were without discipline, without the
steadying and heartening influence of trained leaders, when all their
circumstances were new and strange and charged with exaggerated 
terrors, and before the invaluable experience of actual collision
in the field had turned them from rabbits into soldiers. If this side
of the picture of that early day has not before been put into
history, then history has been, to that degree incomplete, for it
had and has its rightful place there. There was more Bull Run material
scattered through the early camps of this country than exhibited itself
at Bull Run. And yet, it learned it's trade presently and helped to
fight the great battles later. I could have become a soldier myself
if I had waited. I had got part of it learned, I knew more about
retreating than the man that invented retreating.