Title: Bela 

I was travelling along the post road from Tiflis. The only
luggage in the carriage was one small portmanteau half-full of
travel notes about Georgia. Fortunately for you the greater part
of them has been lost since then, though luckily for me the
ca«e and the rest of the things in it have survived.
The sun was already slipping behind a snow-capped ridge
when I drove into Koishaur Valley. The Ossetian coachman,
singing at the top of his voice, urged his horses on relentlessly
to reach the summit of Koishaur Mountain before nightfall.
What a glorious spot this valley is! All around it tower
formidable mountains, reddish crags draped with hanging ivy
and crowned with clusters of plane-trees, yellow cliffs grooved
by torrents, with a gilded fringe of snow high above, while
down below the Aragva embraces a nameless stream that
noisily bursts forth from a black, gloom-filled gorge, and then
stretches in a silvery ribbon into the distance, its surface
shimmering like the scaly back of a snake.
On reaching the foot of Koishaur Mountain we stopped
outside a dukhan where some twenty Georgians and
mountaineers made up a noisy assemblage; nearby a camel
caravan had halted for the night. I had to hire oxen to haul my
carriage to the top of the confounded mountain for it was
already autumn and a thin layer of ice covered the ground, and
the climb was about two versts in length.
There was nothing for it but to hire six oxen and several
Ossetians. One of them hoisted my portmanteau on his
shoulder and the others set to helping the oxen along, doing
little more than shout, however.
Behind my carriage came another, pulled by four oxen with
no visible exertion although the vehicle was piled high with
baggage. This rather surprised me. In the wake of the carriage
walked its owner, puffing at a small silver-inlaid Kabardian
pipe. He was wearing an officer's coat without epaulettes and a
shaggy Cherkess cap. He looked about fifty, his swarthy face
betrayed a long acquaintanceship with the Caucasian sun, and
his prematurely grey moustache belied his firm step and
vigorous appearance. I went up to him and bowed; he silently
returned my greeting, blowing out an enormous cloud of
smoke.
"I take it we are fellow-travellers?"
He bowed again, but did not say a word.
"I suppose you are going to Stavropol?"
"Yes, sir, I am . . . with some government baggage."
"Will you please explain to me how it is that four oxen
easily manage to pull your heavy carriage while six beasts can
barely haul my empty one with the help of all these Ossetians?"
He smiled shrewdly, casting an appraising glance at me.
"I daresay you haven't been long in the Caucasus?"
"About a year," I replied.
He smiled again.
"Why do you ask?"
"No particular reason, sir. They're terrific rogues, these
Asiatics! You don't think their yelling helps much, do you? You
can't tell what the devil they're saying. But the oxen understand
them all right; hitch up twenty of the beasts if you wish and
they won't budge once those fellows begin yelling in their
tongue. . . . Terrific cheats, they are. And what can you do to
them? They do like to skin the traveller. Spoiled, they are, the
scoundrels . . . you'll see they'll make you tip them too. I know7
them by now, they won't fool me!"
"Have you served long in these parts?"
"Yes, ever since Alexei Petrovich was here," he replied,
drawing himself up. "When he arrived at the line I was a
sublieutenant, and under him was promoted twice for service
against the mountaineers."
"And now?"
"Now I am in the third line battalion. And you, may I ask?"
I told him.
This brought the conversation to an end and we walked
along side by side in silence. On top of the mountain we ran
into snow. The sun set and night followed day without any
interval in between as is usual in the South; thanks to the
glistening snow, however, we could easily pick out the road
which still continued to climb, though less steeply than before.
I gave orders to put my portmanteau in the carriage and replace
the oxen with horses, and turned to look back at the valley
down below for the last time, but a thick mist that rolled in
waves from the gorges blanketed it completely and not a single
sound reached us from its depths. The Ossetians vociferously
besieged me, demanding money for vodka; but the captain
shouted at them so fiercely that they dispersed in a moment.
"You see what they are like!" he grumbled. "They don't
know enough Russian to ask for a piece of bread, but they've
learned to beg for tips:
'Officer, give me money for vodka!' To me the Tatars are
better—they're teetotallers at least. . . . "'
Another verst remained to the post station. It was quiet all
around, so quiet that you could trace the flight of a mosquito by
its buzz. A deep gorge yawned black to the left; beyond it and
ahead of us the dark-blue mountain peaks wrinkled with gorges
and gullies and topped by layers of snow loomed against the
pale horizon that still retained the last glimmer of twilight.
Stars began to twinkle in the dark sky, and strangely enough it
seemed that they were far higher here than in our northern sky.
On both sides of the road naked black boulders jutted up from
the ground, and here and there some shrubs peeped from under
the snow; not a single dead leaf rustled, and it was pleasant to
hear in the midst of this lifeless somnolence of nature the
snorting of the tired post horses and the uneven tinkling of the
Russian carriage bells.
"Tomorrow will be a fine day," I observed, but the captain
did not reply. Instead he pointed to a tall mountain rising
directly ahead of us.
"What's that?" I asked.
"Mount Goud."
"Yes?"
"See how it smokes?''
Indeed, Mount Goud was smoking; light wisps of mist crept
along its sides while a black cloud rested on the summit, so
black that it stood out as a blotch even against the dark sky.
We could already make out the post station and the roofs of
the huts around it, and welcoming lights were dancing ahead
when the gusts of cold raw wind came whistling down the
gorge and it began to drizzle. Barely had I thrown a felt cape
over my shoulders than the snow came. I looked at the captain
with respect now. . . .
"We'll have to stay here overnight," he said, annoyed. "You
can't journey through the hills in a blizzard like this. See any
avalanches on Krestovaya?" he asked a coachman.
"No, sir," the Ossetian replied. "But there's a lot just waiting
to come down."
As there was no room for travellers at the post house, we
were given lodgings in a smoky hut. I invited my fellowtraveller to join me at tea for I had with me a cast-iron teakettle—my sole comfort on my Caucasian travels.
The hut was built against a cliff. Three wet, slippery steps
led up to the door. I groped my way in and stumbled upon a
cow, for these people have a cowshed for an anteroom. I could
not make out where to go; on one side sheep were bleating and
on the other a dog growled. Fortunately a glimmer of light
showed through the gloom and guided me to another opening
that looked like a door. Here a rather interesting scene
confronted me: the spacious hut with a roof supported by two
smoke-blackened posts was full of people. A fire built on the
bare earth crackled in the middle and the smoke, forced back
by the wind through the opening in the roof, hung so thick that
it took some time before I could distinguish anything around
me. By the fire sat two old women, a swarm of children and a
lean Georgian man, all of them dressed in tatters. There was
nothing to do but to make ourselves comfortable by the fire and
light up our pipes, and soon the teakettle was singing merrily.
"Pitiable creatures!" I observed to the captain, nodding
toward our grimy hosts who stared at us silently with
something like stupefaction.
"A dull-witted people," he replied. "Believe me, they can't
do a thing, nor can they learn anything either. Our Kabardians
or Chechens, rogues and vagabonds though they be, are at least
good fighters, whereas these take no interest even in arms: you
won't find a decent dagger on a single one of them. But what
can you expect from Ossetians!"
"Were you long in Chechna?"
"Quite a while—ten years garrisoning a fort with a
company, out Kamenny Brod way. Do you know the place?"
"Heard of it."
"Yes, sir, we had enough of the ruffians; now, thank God,
things are quieter, but there was a time when you couldn't
venture a hundred paces beyond the rampart without some
hairy devil stalking you, ready to put a halter around your neck
or a bullet through the back of your head the moment he caught
you napping. But they were stout fellows anyway."
"You must have had a good many adventures?" I asked,
spurred by curiosity.
"Aye, many indeed. . . . "
Thereupon he began to pluck at the left tip of his
moustache, his head drooped and he sank into deep thought. I
very badly wanted to get some sort of story out of him—a
desire that is natural to anyone who travels about, recording
things. In the meantime the tea came to a boil; I dug out two
traveller's tumblers from my portmanteau, poured out tea and
placed one before the captain. He took a sip and muttered as if
to himself: "Yes, many indeed!" The exclamation raised my
hopes, for I knew that Caucasian old-timers like to talk; they
seldom have a chance to do so, for a man may be stationed a
full five years with a company somewhere in the backwoods
without anyone to greet him with a "Good day" (that mode of
address does not belong to the sergeant's vocabulary). And
there is so much to talk about: the wild, strange people all
around, the constant dangers, and the remarkable adventures;
one cannot help thinking it is a pity that we record so little of it.
'"Would you care to add a little rum?" I asked. "I have some
white rum from Tiflis, it will warm you up in this cold."
"No, thanks, I don't drink."
"How is that?"
"Well ... swore oft the stuff. Once when I was still a
sublieutenant we went on a bit of a spree, you know how it
happens, and that very night there was an alarm. So we showed
up before the ranks on the gay side, and there was the devil to
pay when Alexei Petrovich found out. Lord preserve me from
seeing a man as furious as he was; we escaped being courtmartialled by a hair's breadth. That's the way it is: sometimes
you got to spend a whole year without seeing anyone, and if
you take to drink you're done for."
On hearing this I nearly lost hope.
"Take even the Cherkess," he went on. "As soon as they
drink their fill of boza at a wedding or a funeral the fight
begins. Once I barely managed to escape alive although I was
the guest of a peaceable prince."
"How did it happen?"
"Well," he filled and lit his pipe, took a long draw on it, and
began the story, "you see, I was stationed at the time at a fort
beyond the Terek with a company—that was nearly five years
back. Once in the autumn a convoy came with foodstuffs, and
with it an officer, a young man of about twenty-five. He
reported to me in full dress uniform and announced that he had
been ordered to join me at the fort. He was so slim and pale
and his uniform so immaculate that I could tell at once that he
was a newcomer to the Caucasus. 'You must have been
transferred here from Russia?' I asked him. 'Yes, sir,' he replied.
I took his hand and said: 'Glad to have you here, very glad. It'll
be a bit dull for you . . . but we'll get along very well, I'm sure.
Call me simply Maxim Maximych, if you like, and, another
thing, you need not bother wearing full dress uniform. Just
come around in your forage cap.' He was shown his quarters
and he settled down in the fort."
"What was his name?" I asked Maxim Maximych. "
"Grigori Alexandrovich Pechorin. A fine chap he was, I
assure you, though a bit queer. For instance, he would spend
days on end hunting in rain or cold; everybody else would be
chilled and exhausted, but not he. Yet sometimes a mere
draught in his room would be enough for him to claim he had
caught cold; a banging shutter might make him start and turn
pale, yet I myself saw him go at a wild boar single-handed;
sometimes you couldn't get a word out of him for hours on end,
but when he occasionally did start telling stories you'd split
your sides laughing. . . . Yes, sir, a most curious sort of fellow
he was, and, apparently, rich too, judging by the quantity of
expensive trinkets he had."
"How long was he with you?" I asked.
"A good year. That was a memorable year for me; he
caused me plenty of trouble, God forgive him! But after all,
there are people who are predestined to have all sorts of odd
things happen to them!"
"Odd things?" I exclaimed eagerly as I poured him some
more tea.
 "I'll tell you the story. Some six versts from the fort there
lived a peaceable prince. His son, a lad of about fifteen, got
into the habit of riding over to see us; not a day passed that he
didn't come for one reason or another. Grigori Alexandrovich
and I really spoiled him. What a scapegrace he was, ready for
anything, whether it was to lean down from his saddle to pick
up a cap from the ground while galloping by or to try his hand
at marksmanship. But there was one bad thing about him: he
had a terrible weakness for money. Once for a joke Grigori
Alexandrovich promised him a gold piece if he stole the best
goat from his father's herd, and what do you think? The very
next night he dragged the animal in by the horns. Sometimes, if
we just tried teasing him, he would flare up and reach for his
dagger. 'Your head's too hot for your own good, Azaimat,' I
would tell him. 'That's yamari for your topknot!'
"Once the old prince himself came over to invite us to a
wedding; he was giving away his elder daughter and since we
were kunaks there was no way of declining, you know, Tatar
or not. So we set out. A pack of barking dogs met us in the
village. On seeing us the women hid themselves; the faces we
did catch a glimpse of were far from pretty. 'I had a much better
opinion of Cherkess women,' Grigori Alexandrovich said to
me. 'You wait a while,' I replied, smiling. I had something up
my sleeve.
"There was quite a crowd assembled in the prince's house.
It's the custom among Asiatics, you know, to invite to their
weddings everyone they chance to meet. We were welcomed
with all due honours and shown to the best room. Before going
in, though, I took care to note where they put our horses, just in
case something unforeseen happened, you know."
"How do they celebrate weddings?" I asked the captain.
"Oh, in the usual way. First the mullah reads them
something from the Koran, then presents axe given to the
newly-weds and all their relatives. They eat and drink boza,
until finally the horsemanship display begins, and there is
always some kind of filthy, tattered creature riding a mangy
lame nag playing the buffoon to amuse the company. Later,
when it grows dark, what we would call a ball begins in the
best room. Some miserable old man strums away on a threestringed ... can't remember what they call it ... something like
our balalaika. The girls and young men line up in two rows,
facing each other, clap their hands and sing. Then one of the
girls and a man step into the centre and begin to chant verses to
each other improvising as they go while the rest pick up the
refrain. Pechorin and I occupied the place of honour, and as we
sat there the host's younger daughter, a girl of sixteen or so,
came up to him and sang to him ... what should I call it ... a sort
of compliment."
"You don't remember what she sang by any chance?"
"Yes, I think it went something like this: 'Our young
horsemen are stalwart and their coats are encrusted with silver,
but the young Russian officer is more stalwart still and his
epaulettes are of gold. He is like a poplar among the others, yet
he shall neither grow nor bloom in our orchard.' Pechorin rose,
bowed to her, pressing his hand to his forehead and heart, and
asked me to reply to her. Knowing their language well I
translated his reply.
"When she walked away I whispered to Grigori
Alexandrovich: 'Well, what do you think of her?'
" 'Exquisite,' replied he. 'What is her name?' 'Her name is
Bela,' I replied.
"And indeed, she was beautiful: tall, slim, and her eyes as
black as a chamois looked right into your soul. Pechorin grew
pensive and did not take his eyes off her, and she frequently
stole a glance at him. But Pechorin was not the only one who
admired the pretty princess: from a corner of the room another
pair of eyes, fixed and flaming, stared at her. I looked closer
and recognized my old acquaintance Kazbich. He was a man
you couldn't say was friendly, though there was nothing to
show he was hostile towards us. There were a good many
suspicions but he was never caught at any trickery.
Occasionally he brought rams to us at the fort and sold them
cheap, but he never bargained: you had to pay him what he
asked; he would never out a price even if his life depended on
it. It was said about him that he would ride out beyond the
Kuban with the abreks, and to tell the truth, he did look like a
brigand: he was short, wiry and broad-shouldered. And clever
he was, as clever as the devil! The beshmet he wore was
always torn and patched, but his weapons were set in silver. As
for his horse, it was famous in all Kabarda, and indeed, you
couldn't think of a better horse. The horsemen all around had
very good reason to envy him, and time and again they tried to
steal the animal, but in vain. I can still see that horse as if it
were before me now: as black as pitch, with legs like taut
violin strings and eyes no worse than Bela's. He was a strong
animal too, could gallop fifty versts at a stretch, and as for
training, he would follow his master like a dog and even
recognized his voice. Kazbich never bothered to tether the
animal. A regular brigand horse!
"That evening Kazbich was more morose than I had ever
seen him, and I noticed that he had a coat of mail under his
beshmet. 'There must be a reason for the armour,' thought I. 'He
is evidently scheming something.'
"It was stuffy indoors, so I stepped out into the fresh air.
The night was settling on the hills and the mist was beginning
to weave in and out among the gorges.
"It occurred to me to look into the shelter where our horses
stood and see whether they were being fed, besides which
caution is never amiss. After all, I had a fine horse and a good
many Kabardians had cast fond glances at him and said:
'Yakshi tkhe, chok yakshi!'
"I was picking my way along the fence when suddenly I
heard voices; one of the speakers I recognized right away: it
was that scapegrace Azamat, our host's son. The other spoke
more slowly and quietly. 'I wonder what they're up to,' thought
I. 'I hope it's not about my horse.' I dropped down behind the
fence and cocked my ears, trying not to miss a word. It was
impossible to catch everything, for now and then the singing
and the hum of voices from the hut drowned out the
conversation I was so interested to hear.
" 'That's a fine horse you have,' Azamat was saying. 'Were I
the master of my house and the owner of a drove of three
hundred mares, I'd give half of them for your horse, Kazbich!'
" 'So it's Kazbich,' thought I and remembered the coat of
mail." 
'You're right,' Kazbich replied after a momentary silence,
'you won't find another like him in all Kabarda. Once, beyond
the Terek it was, I rode with the abreks to pick up some
Russian horses. We were unlucky though, and had to scatter.
Four Cossacks came after me; I could already hear the gyaurs
shouting behind me, and ahead of me was a thicket. I bent low
in the saddle, trusted myself to Allah and for the first time in
my life insulted the horse by striking him. Like a bird he flew
between the branches; the thorns tore my clothes and the dry
karagach twigs lashed my face. The horse leapt over stumps
and crashed through the brush chest on. It would have been
better for me to slip off him in some glade and take cover in the
woods on foot, but I could not bear to part with him so I held
on, and the Prophet rewarded me. Some bullets whistled past
overhead; I could hear the Cossacks, now dismounted, running
along my trail. . . . Suddenly a deep gully opened up in front;
my horse hesitated for a moment, and then jumped. But on the
other side his hind legs slipped off the sheer edge and he was
left holding on by the forelegs. I dropped the reins and slipped
into the gully. This saved the horse, who managed to pull
himself up. The Cossacks saw all this, but none of them came
down into the ravine to look for me; they probably gave me up
for dead. Then I heard them going after my horse. My heart
bled as I crawled through the thick grass of the gully until I
was out of the woods. Now I saw some Cossacks riding out
from the thicket into the open and my Karagoz galloping
straight at them. With a shout they made a dash for him. They
chased him for a long time. One of them almost got a halter
around his neck once or twice; I trembled, turned away and
began praying. Looking up a few moments later I saw my
Karagoz flying free as the wind, his tail streaming while the
gyaurs trailed far behind in the plain on their exhausted horses.
I swear by Allah this is the truth! I sat in my gully until far into
the night. And what do you think happened, Azamat? Suddenly
through the darkness I heard a horse running along the brink of
the gully, snorting, neighing and stamping his hoofs; I
recognized the voice of my Karagoz, for it was he, my
comrade! Since then we have never parted.
"You could hear the man patting the smooth neck of the
horse and addressing him with all kinds of endearments.
" 'Had I a drove of a thousand mares,' said Azamat, 'I would
give it to you for your Karagoz.'
" Yok, I wouldn't take it,' replied Kazbich indifferently.
" 'Listen, Kazbich,' Azamat coaxed him. 'You are a good
man and a brave jigit; my father fears the Russians and does
not let me go into the mountains. Give me your horse and I will
do anything you want, I'll steal for you my father's best musket
or sabre, whatever you wish—and his sabre is a real gurda,
lay the blade against your hand and it will cut deep into the
flesh; mail like yours won't stop it.'
"Kazbich was silent. 
"No."
" 'When I first saw your horse,' Azamat went on, 'prancing
under you, his nostrils dilated and sparks flying under his
hoofs, something strange happened in my soul, and I lost
interest in everything. I have disdained my father's best horses,
ashamed to be seen riding them, and I have been sick at heart.
In my misery I have spent days on end sitting on a crag,
thinking of nothing but your fleet-footed Karagoz with his
proud stride and sleek back as straight as an arrow, his blazing
eyes looking straight into mine as if he wanted to speak to me.
I shall die, Kazbich, if you will not sell him to me,' said Azamat
in a trembling voice.
"I thought I heard him sob; and I must tell you that Azamat
Was a most stubborn lad and even when he was younger
nothing could ever make him cry.
"In reply to his tears I heard something like a laugh.
"'Listen!' said Azamat his voice firm now. 'You see I am
ready to do anything. I could steal my sister for you if you
want. How she can dance and sing! And her gold embroidery is
something wonderful! The Turkish Padishah himself never had
a wife like her. If you want her, wait for me tomorrow night in
the gorge where the stream flows; I shall go by with her on the
way to the next village—and she'll be yours. Isn't Bela worth
your steed?'
"For a long, long time Kazbich was silent. At last instead of
replying, he began softly singing an old song:
Ours are the fairest of maidens that be:
Eyes like the stars, by their light do I see.
Sweet flits the time when we cosset a maid,
Sweeter's the freedom of any young blade.
Wives by the dozen are purchased with gold,
A mettlesome steed is worth riches untold;
Swift o'er the plains like a whirlwind he flies,
Never betrays you, and never tells lies.
"In vain Azamat pleaded with him; he tried tears, flattery,
and cajolery, until finally Kazbich lost patience with him:
"'Get away with you, boy! Are you mad? You could never
ride my horse! He'd throw you after the first three paces and
you'd smash your head against a rock.'
" 'Me?' Azamat screamed in a fury, and his child's dagger
rang against the coat of mail. A strong arm flung him back and
he fell against the wattle fence so violently that it shook. 'Now
the fun will begin,' thought I and dashed into the stable, bridled
our horses and led them to the yard at the back. Two minutes
later a terrific uproar broke out in the hut. This is what
happened: Azamat ran into the hut in a torn beshmet shouting
that Kazbich had tried to kill him. Everybody rushed out and
went for their rifles—and the fun was on! There was screaming
and shouting and shots were fired, but Kazbich was already on
his horse spinning around like a demon in the midst of the
crowd and warding off assailants with his sabre. 'Bad business
to get mixed up in this,' said I to Grigori Alexandrovich as I
caught him by the arm. 'Hadn't we better clear out as fast as we
can?'
" 'Let's wait a bit and see how it ends.'
" 'It's sure to end badly; that's what always happens with
these Asiatics, as soon as they have their fill of drink they go
slashing each other.' We mounted and rode home."
"What happened to Kazbich?" I asked impatiently.
"What can happen to these people?" replied the captain,
finishing his glass of tea. "He got away, of course."
"Not even wounded, was he?" I asked.
"The Lord only knows. They're tough, the rogues! I have
seen some of them in engagements; a man may be cut up into
ribbons with bayonets and still he continues brandishing his
sabre." After a brief silence the captain went on, stamping his
foot:
"There is one thing I'll never forgive myself for. When we
got back to the fort, some devil prompted me to tell Grigori
Alexandrovich what I had overheard behind the fence. He
laughed—the fox—though he was already cooking up a
scheme."
"What was it? I should like to hear it."
"I suppose I'll have to tell you. Since I began telling the
story, I might as well finish.
"Some four days later Azamat rode up to the fort. As usual,
he went in to see Grigori Alexandrovich, who always had some
delicacies for him. I was there too. The talk turned to horses,
and Pechorin began to praise Kazbich's horse; as spirited and
beautiful as a chamois the steed was, and as Pechorin put it,
there simply was no other horse like it in all the world.
"The Tatar boy's eyes lit up, but Pechorin pretended not to
notice it; I tried to change the subject, but at once he brought it
back to Kazbich's horse. This happened each time Azamat
came. About three weeks later I noticed that Azamat was
growing pale and wasting away as they do from love in novels.
What was it all about?
"You see, I got the whole story later. Grigori Alexandrovich
egged him on to a point when the lad was simply desperate.
Finally he put it point-blank: 'I can see, Azamat, that you want
that horse very badly. Yet you have as little chance of getting it
as of seeing the back of your own head. Now tell me what
would you give if someone gave it to you?'
" 'Anything he asks,' replied Azamat.
" 'In that case I'll get the horse for you, but on one
condition. . . .
Swear you will carry it out?'
" 'I swear. . . . And you must swear too!'
" 'Good! I swear you'll get the horse, only you have to give
me your sister Bela in exchange. Karagoz shall be her kalym!
I hope the bargain suits you.'
"Azamat was silent.
" 'You don't want to? As you wish. I thought you were a
man, but I see you're still a child: you're too young to ride in
the saddle.'
"Azamat flared up. 'What about my father?' he asked.
" 'Doesn't he ever go anywhere?'
" 'That's true, he does. . . . '
" 'So you agree?'
" 'I agree,' whispered Azamat, pale as death itself. 'When?'
"'The next time Kazbich comes here; he has promised to
bring a dozen sheep. The rest is my business. And you take
care of your end of the bargain, Azamat!'
"So they arranged the whole business, and I must say it was
a bad business indeed. Later I said so to Pechorin, but he only
replied that the primitive Cherkess girl ought to be happy to
have such a fine husband as himself, for, after all, he would be
her husband according to the local custom, and that Kazbich
was a brigand who should be punished anyway. Judge for
yourself, what could I say against this? But at the time I knew
nothing about the conspiracy. So one day Kazbich came asking
whether we wanted sheep and honey, and I told him to bring
some the day after. 'Azamat,' Grigori Alexandrovich said to the
lad, 'tomorrow Karagoz will be in my hands. If Bela is not here
tonight you will not see the horse. . . . '
" 'Good!' said Azamat and galloped back to his village. In
the evening Grigori Alexandrovich armed himself and rode out
of the fort. How they managed everything, I don't know—but
at night they both returned and the sentry saw a woman lying
across Azamat's saddle with hands and feet tied and head
wrapped in a veil."
"And the horse?" I asked the captain.
"Just a moment, just a moment. Early the next morning
Kazbich came, driving along the dozen sheep he wanted to sell.
Tying his horse to a fence, he came to see me and I regaled him
with tea, for, scoundrel though he was, he nevertheless was a
kunak of mine.
"We began to chat about this and that. Suddenly I saw
Kazbich start; his face twisted and he dashed for the window,
but it unfortunately opened to the backyard. 'What's happened?'
I asked.
"'My horse ... horse!' he said, shaking all over.
"And true enough, I heard the beat of hoofs. 'Some Cossack
must have arrived.'
"'No! Urus yaman, yamare! he cried and dashed out like a
wild panther. In two strides he was in the courtyard; at the
gates of the fort a sentry barred his way with a musket, but he
leaped over the weapon and began running down the road. In
the distance a cloud of dust whirled—it was Azamat urging on
the spirited Karagoz. Kazbich drew his gun from its holster and
fired as he ran. For a minute he stood motionless until he was
certain he had missed; then he screamed, dashed the gun to
pieces against the stones, and rolled on the ground crying like a
baby. . . . People from the fort gathered around him—but he
did not see anyone, and alter standing about for a while they all
went back. I had the money for the sheep placed next to him,
but he did not touch it; he only lay there face down like a
corpse. Would you believe it, he lay like that all through the
night? Only the next morning he returned to the fort to ask
whether anyone could tell him who the thief was. A sentry who
had seen Azamat untie the horse and gallop off did not think it
necessary to conceal the fact. When Kazbich heard the name
his eyes flashed and he set out for the village where Azamat's
father lived."
"What did the father do?"
"The whole trouble was that Kazbich did not find him; he
had gone off somewhere for six days or so. Had he not done so
could Azamat have carried off his sister?
"The father returned to find both daughter and son gone.
The lad was a wily one; he knew very well that his head
wouldn't be worth anything if he got caught. So he has been
missing ever since; most likely he joined some abrek band and
perhaps ended his mad career beyond the Terek, or maybe the
Kuban. And that's no more than he deserved!
"I must admit that it wasn't easy for me either. As soon as I
learned that the Cherkess girl was at Grigori Alexandrovich's, I
put on my epaulettes and strapped on my sword and went to
see him.
"He was lying on the bed in the first room, one hand under
his head and the other holding a pipe that had gone out. The
door leading to the next room was locked, and there was no
key in the lock; all this I noticed at once. I coughed and
stamped my heels on the threshold, but he pretended not to
hear.
"'Ensign! Sir!' I said as severely as I could. 'Don't you
realize that I've come to see you?'
" 'Ah, how do you do, Maxim Maximych. Have a pipe,' he
replied without getting up.
"'I beg your pardon! I am no Maxim Maximych: I am a
captain to you!'
" 'Oh, it's all the same. Would you care to have some tea? If
you only knew what a load I've got on my mind!'
" 'I know everything,' I replied, walking up to the bed.
" 'That's all the better, then. I am in no mood to go over it
again.'
" 'Ensign, you have committed an offence for which I too
may have to answer. . . . '
" 'Well, why not? Have we not always shared everything
equally?'
" 'This is no time to joke. Will you surrender your sword?'
" 'Mitka, the sword!'
"Mitka brought the sword. Having thus done my duty, I sat
down on the bed and said: 'Listen here, Grigori Alexandrovich,
you'd best admit that it's wrong.'
" 'What's wrong?'
"'To have kidnapped Bela. What a scoundrel that Azamat is!
Come, now, admit it,' I said to him.
"'Why should I? She happens to please me.'
"What would you have me reply to that? I did not know
what to do. Nevertheless after a moment's silence I told him he
would have to give the girl back if her father insisted.
" 'I don't see why I should!'
" 'But what if he finds out that she is here?'
" 'How will he?'
"Again I was in a blind alley.
" 'Listen, Maxim Maximych,' said Pechorin, rising, 'you're a
good soul — if we give the girl to that barbarian he'll either kill
her or sell her. What has been done cannot be undone, and it
won't do to spoil things by being overzealous. You keep my
sword, but leave her with me. . . . '
" 'Supposing you let me see her,' said I.
" 'She's behind that door; I myself have been trying in vain
to see her. She sits there in a corner all huddled up in her shawl
and will neither speak nor look at you; she's as timid as a
gazelle. I hired the dukhan keeper's wife who speaks Tatar to
look after her and get her accustomed to the idea that she is
mine—for she will never belong to anyone but myself,' he
added, striking the table with his fist.
"I reconciled myself to this too. . . . What would you have
had me do? There are people who always get their own way."
"What happened in the end?" I asked Maxim Maximych.
"Did he actually win her over or did she pine away in captivity
longing for her native village?"
"Now why should she have longed for her native village?
She could see the very same mountains from the fort as she had
seen from the village, and that's all these barbarians want.
Moreover, Grigori Alexandrovich gave her some present every
day. At first she proudly tossed the gifts aside without a word,
whereupon they became the property of the dukhan keeper's
wife and stimulated her eloquence. Ah, gifts! What wouldn't a
woman do for a bit of coloured rag! But I digress. . . . Grigori
Alexandrovich strove long and hard to win her; in the
meantime he learned to speak Tatar and she began to
understand our language. Little by little she learned to look at
him, at first askance, but she was always melancholy and I too
could not help feeling sad when I heard her from the next room
singing her native songs in a low voice. I shall never forget a
scene I once witnessed while passing the window: Bela was
seated on a bench, her head bowed, and Grigori Alexandrovich
stood before her. 'Listen, my peri,' he was saying, 'don't you
realize that sooner or later you must be mine—why then do
you torment me so? Or perhaps you love some Chechen? If
you do, I will let you go home at once.' She shuddered barely
perceptibly and shook her head. 'Or,' he went on, 'am I
altogether hateful to you?' She sighed. 'Perhaps your faith
forbids your loving me?' She grew pale but did not say a word.
'Believe me, there is only one Allah for all people, and if he
permits me to love you, why should he forbid you to return my
love?' She looked him straight in the face as if struck by this
new thought; her eyes betrayed suspicion and sought
reassurance. And what eyes she had! They shone like two
coals.
'"Listen to me, sweet, kind Bela!' Pechorin continued. 'You
can see how I love you. I am ready to do anything to cheer you;
I want you to be happy, and if you keep on grieving I shall die.
Tell me, you will be more cheerful?' She thought for a moment,
her black eyes searching his face, then smiled tenderly and
nodded in agreement. He took her hand and began to persuade
her to kiss him; but she resisted weakly and repeated over and
over again: 'Please, please, no, no.' He became persistent; she
trembled and began to sob. 'I am your captive, your slave,' she
said, 'and of course you can force me.' And again there were
tears.
"Grigori Alexandrovich struck his forehead with his fist and
ran into the next room. I went in to him; he was gloomily
pacing up and down with arms folded. 'What now, old chap?' I
asked him. 'She's not a woman, but a she-devil!' he replied. 'But
I give you my word that she will be mine!' I shook my head.
'Do you want to wager?' he said. "I'll give her a week.' 'Done!'
We shook on it and parted.
"The next day he sent a messenger to Kizlyar to make
diverse purchases and there was no end to the array of various
kinds of Persian cloth that was brought back.
" 'What do you think, Maxim Maximych,' he said as he
showed me the gifts, 'will an Asiatic beauty be able to resist a
battery like this?' 'You don't know Cherkess women,' I replied.
'They're nothing like Georgian or Transcaucasian Tatar women
—nothing like them. They have their own rules of conduct;
different upbringing, you know.' Grigori Alexandrovich smiled
and began whistling a march air.
"It turned out that I was right: the gifts did only half the
trick; she became more amiable and confiding—but nothing
more. So he decided to play his last card. One morning he
ordered his horse saddled, dressed in Cherkess fashion, armed
himself, and went in to her. 'Bela,' he said, 'you know how I
love you. I decided to carry you off, believing that when you
came to know me you would love me too. But I made a
mistake; so, farewell, I leave you the mistress of everything I
have, and if you wish, you can return to your father—you are
free, I have wronged you and must be punished. Farewell, I
shall ride away, where, I don't know. Perhaps it will not be long
before I am cut down by a bullet or a sabre blow; when that
happens, remember me and try to forgive me.' He turned away
and extended his hand to her in parting. She did not take the
hand, nor did she say a word. Standing behind the door I saw
her through the crack, and I was sorry for her—such a deathly
pallor had spread over her pretty little face. Hearing no reply,
Pechorin took several steps towards the door. He was
trembling, and do you know, I quite believe he was capable of
actually doing what he threatened. The Lord knows that's the
kind of man he was. But barely had he touched the door when
she sprang up, sobbing and threw her arms around his neck.
Believe me, I also wept standing there behind the door, that is,
I didn't exactly weep, but—well, anyway it was silly."
The captain fell silent.
"I might as well confess,'' he said after a while, tugging at
his moustache, "I was annoyed because no woman had ever
loved me like that."
"How long did their happiness last?" I asked.
"Well, she admitted that Pechorin had often appeared in her
dreams since the day she first saw him and that no other man
had ever made such an impression on her. Yes, they were
happy!"'
"How boring!" I exclaimed involuntarily. Indeed, I was
expecting a tragic end and it was a shock to see my hopes
collapse so suddenly. "Don't tell me the father did not guess she
was with you in the fort."
"I believe he did suspect. A few days later, however, we
heard that the old man had been killed. This is how it
happened. . . . "
My interest was again aroused.
"I must tell you that Kazbich got the idea that Azamat had
stolen the horse with his father's consent, at least I think so. So
he lay in ambush one day some three versts beyond the village
when the old man was returning from his futile search for his
daughter. The old man had left his liegemen lagging behind and
was plunged deep in thought as he rode slowly down the road
through the deepening twilight, when Kazbich suddenly sprang
catlike from behind a bush, leapt behind him on the horse, cut
him down with a blow of his dagger and seized the reins. Some
of the liegemen saw it all from a hill, but though they set out in
pursuit they could not overtake Kazbich."
"So he compensated himself for the loss of his horse and
took revenge as well," I said in order to draw an opinion out of
my companion.
"Of course, he was absolutely right according to their
lights," said the captain.
I was struck by the ability of the Russian to reconcile
himself to the customs of the people among whom he happens
to live. I do not know whether this mental quality is a virtue or
a vice, but it does reveal a remarkable flexibility and that sober
common sense which forgives evil wherever it feels it to be
necessary, or impossible to eradicate.
Meanwhile we had finished our tea. Outside the horses had
been harnessed long since and were now standing shivering in
the snow; the paling moon in the western sky was about to
immerse itself in the black clouds that trailed like tattered bits
of a rent curtain from the mountain peaks in the distance. We
stepped out into the open. Contrary to the predicting of my
companion, the weather had cleared and promised a calm
morning. The stars, intertwined in garlands of a fantastic
pattern in the far heavens, went out one after another as the
pale glimmer of the east spread out over the dark lilac sky,
gradually casting its glow on the steep mountainsides blanketed
by virginal snow. To right and left yawned gloomy, mysterious
abysses, and the mist, coiling and twisting like a snake,
crawled into them along the cracks and crevices of the cliffs as
if m apprehension of coming day.
There was a great peace in the heavens and on earth as
there is in the hearts of men at morning prayers. Only now and
then the cold east wind came in gusts ruffling the hoary manes
of the horses. We set out, the five lean nags hauling our
carriages with difficulty along the tortuous road up Mount
Goud. We walked behind, setting stones under the wheels when
the horses could pull no longer; it seemed as if the road must
lead straight to heaven, for it rose higher and higher as far as
the eye could see and finally was lost in the cloud that had been
reposing on the mountain summit since the day before like a
vulture awaiting its prey. The snow crunched underfoot; the air
grew so rare that it was painful to breathe; I continually felt the
blood rushing to my head, yet a feeling of elation coursed
through my being and somehow it felt good to be so much
above the world—a childish feeling, I admit, but as we drift
farther away from the conventions of society and draw closer
to nature we willy-nilly become children again: the soul is
unburdened of whatever it has acquired and it becomes what it
once was and what it will surely be again. Anyone who has had
occasion as I have to roam in the deserted mountains, feasting
his eyes upon their fantastic shapes and eagerly inhaling the
invigorating air of the gorges, will understand my urge to
describe, to portray, to paint these magic canvases. At last we
reached the summit of Mount Goud, and paused to look around
us: a grey cloud rested on the mountain top and its cold breath
held the threat of an imminent blizzard; but the east was so
clear and golden that we, that is, the captain and I, promptly
forgot about it. . . . Yes, the captain too: for simple hearts feel
the beauty and majesty of nature a hundred times more keenly
than do we, rapturous tellers of stories spoken or written.
"You are no doubt accustomed to these magnificent
scenes," I said to him.
"Yes, sir, you can get accustomed even to the whining of
bullets, I mean, accustomed to concealing the involuntary
quickening of your pulse."
"On the contrary, I have been told that to some old soldiers
it is sweet music."
"Yes, it is sweet too, if you please; but only because it
makes the heart beat faster. Look," he added, pointing to the
east, "what heavenly country!"
Indeed, it was a panorama I can hardly hope to see again:
below us lay Koishaur Valley, the Aragva and another river,
tracing their course across it like two silver threads; a bluish
mist crept over it, seeking refuge in the nearest nooks from the
warm rays of the morning; to the right and to the left the
mountain ridges, one higher than the other, criss-crossed and
stretched out into the distance, covered with snow and brush.
Mountains as far as the eye could see, but no two crags alike—
and all this snow burned with a rosy glitter so gay and so vivid
that one would fain have stayed there for ever. The sun barely
showed from behind a dark-blue mountain which only the
experienced eye could distinguish from a storm-cloud, but
above it stretched a crimson belt to which my comrade now
drew my attention. "I told you," he exclaimed, "there's bad
weather ahead; we'll have to hurry or it may catch us on
Krestovaya. Look lively, there!" he shouted to the coachmen.
Chains were passed through the wheels for brakes to
prevent them from getting out of control. Leading the horses by
their bridles we began the descent. To the right of us was a
cliff, and to the left an abyss so deep that an Ossetian village at
the bottom looked like a swallow's nest; I shuddered at the
thought that dozen times a year some courier rides through the
dark night along this road too narrow for two carts to pass,
without alighting from his jolting carriage. One of our drivers
was a Russian peasant from Yaroslavl, the other an Ossetian.
The Ossetian took the leading horse by the bridle after
unhitching the first pair in good time and taking every other
possible precaution, but our heedless Russian did not even
bother to get down from the box. When I suggested that he
might have shown some concern if only for my portmanteau,
which I had no desire to go down into the abyss to recover, he
replied: "Don't worry, sir! With God's help we'll get there just
as well as they. This is not the first time we've done it." And he
was right; true, we might not have got through safely, yet we
did. And if all men gave the matter more thought they would
realize that life is not worth worrying over too much. . . .
Perhaps you wish to hear the story of Bela to he end?
Firstly, however, I am not writing a novel but simply travel
notes, and hence I cannot make the captain resume his story
sooner than he actually did. So you will have to wait, or, if you
wish to do so, skip a few pages; only I do not advise you to, for
the crossing of Mount Krestovaya (or le Mont St. Christophe as
the learned Gamba calls it) is worthy of your interest. And so
we descended from Mount Goud to Chertova Valley. That is a
romantic name for you. Perhaps you already visualize the den
of the Evil Spirit among the inaccessible crags—but if you do,
you are mistaken: Chertova Valley derives its name from the
word "cherta" and not "chart" for the boundary of Georgia once
passed here. The valley was buried under snow-drifts which
gave the scene a rather strong resemblance to Saratov, Tambov
and other spots dear to us in our mother country.
"There's Krestovaya," said the captain as we came down to
Chertova Valley, pointing to a hill shrouded by snow. On the
summit the black outline of a stone cross was visible, and past
it ran a barely discernible road which was used only when the
road along the mountainside was snow-bound. Our drivers said
that there were no snow-slips yet and in order to spare the
horses they took us the roundabout way. Around a turn in the
road we came upon five Ossetians who offered us their
services, and seizing hold of the wheels and shouting, they
began to help our carriage along. The road was dangerous
indeed. To our right, masses of snow hung overhead ready, it
seemed, to crash down into the gorge with the first blast of
wind. Some sections of the narrow road were covered with
snow, which here and there gave way underfoot; others had
been turned to ice under the action of the sun's rays and night
frosts, so that we made headway with difficulty. The horses
kept on slipping, and to the left of us yawned a deep fissure
with a turbulent stream at the bottom that now slipped out of
sight under a crust of ice, now plunged in frothy fury amidst
black boulders. It took us all of two hours to skirt Mount
Krestovava—two hours to negotiate two versts. In the
meantime the clouds came lower and it began to hail and snow.
The wind bursting into the gorges howled and whistled like
Solovey the Brigand, and soon the stone cross was blotted out
by the mist which was coming in waves from the east, each
wave thicker than the other. Incidentally, there is a queer but
generally accepted legend about this cross which claims it was
raised by Emperor Peter I when he travelled through the
Caucasus. Yet, in the first place, Peter was only in Daghestan,
and, secondly, an inscription in big letters on the cross
announced it had been put up on the orders of General
Yermolov, in 1824, to be exact. Despite the inscription, the
legend had taken such firm root that one is at a loss to know
what to believe, all the more so since we are not accustomed to
put our faith in inscriptions.
We had another five versts to descend along the ice-coated
rocky ledges and through soft snow before reaching the station
at Kobi. The horses were exhausted and we thoroughly chilled,
while the blizzard blew harder and harder, much like our
native, northern snow-storms, except that its wild refrain was
sadder and more mournful. "You too, my exile," thought I, "are
mourning your wide, boundless steppes where there was space
to spread out your icy wings, whilst here you are choked and
hemmed in like the eagle who beats against the bars of his iron
cage."
"Looks bad!"' the captain was saying. "Nothing but mist
and snow. Watch out or we'll find ourselves dropping into a
crevice or getting stuck in some wretched hole, and the Baidara
down there will probably be running too high to cross. That's
Asia for you! The rivers are as unreliable as the people."
The drivers shouted and cursed as they whipped the
snorting, balking horses which refused to take another step in
spite of the persuasion of the whip.
"Your Honour," one of the drivers finally said, "we can't
reach Kobi today. Had we not better turn to the left while there
is still time? Over on that slope there are some huts, I believe.
Travellers always halt there in bad weather." Then he added,
pointing to an Ossetian: "They say they will guide us there if
you give them some money for vodka."
"I know it, brother, I know without you telling me!" said the
captain. "These rogues! They'll do anything for a tip."
"All the same you have to admit that we'd be worse off
without them," said I.
"Maybe, maybe," he muttered, "but I know these guides!
They can tell by instinct when to take advantage of you; as if
you couldn't find your way without them."
So we turned to the left and somehow after a good deal of
trouble made our way to the scanty refuge consisting of two
huts built of slabs and stones and surrounded by a wall of the
same material. The tattered inhabitants gave us a cordial
welcome. Later I found out that the government pays and feeds
them on condition that they take in wayfarers who are caught
by the storm.
"It's all for the best," said I, taking a seat by the fire. "Now
you will be able to tell me the rest of the story about Bela; I am
sure that wasn't the end of it."
"What makes you so sure?" replied the captain, with a sly
smile and a twinkle in his eye.
"Because things don't happen like that. Anything that
begins so strangely must end in the same way."
"Well, you guessed right. . . . "
"Glad to hear it."
"It's all very well for you to be glad, but for me it is really
sad to recall. She was a fine girl, Bela was! I grew as fond of
her in the end as if she were my own daughter, and she loved
me too. I ought to tell you that I have no family; I haven't heard
about my father or mother for some twelve years now, and it
didn't occur to me to get myself a wife earlier— and now, you
must admit, it would no longer be seemly. So I was happy to
have found someone to pet. She would sing to us or dance the
Lezghinka. . . . And how she danced! I've seen our provincial
fine ladies and once some twenty years ago I was at the Nobles'
Club in Moscow, but none of them could hold a candle to her.
Grigori Alexandrovich dressed her up like a doll, petted and
fondled her, and she grew so lovely that it was amazing. The
tan disappeared from her face and arms and her cheeks grew
rosy. . . . How gay she was and how she used to tease me, the
little vixen. . . . May God forgive her!"
"What happened when you told her about her father's
death?"
"We kept it from her for a long time, until she became
accustomed to her new position. And when she was told, she
cried for a couple of days and then forgot about it.
"For about four months everything went splendidly. Grigori
Alexandrovich, I must have already told you, had a passion for
hunting. Some irresistible force used to draw him to the forest
to stalk wild boar or goats, and now he had scarcely ventured
beyond the ramparts. Then I noticed he was growing pensive
again; he would pace up and down the room with his arms
folded behind his back. One day without saying a word to
anyone he took his gun and went out, and was lost for the
whole morning; that happened once, twice, and then more and
more frequently. Things are going badly, I thought, something
must have come between them!
"One morning when I dropped in to see them I found Bela
sitting on the bed wearing a black silk beshmet, so pale and sad
that I was really alarmed.
" 'Where's Pechorin?' I asked.
" 'Hunting.'
" 'When did he leave? Today?'
"She did not reply, it seemed difficult for her to speak.
"'No, yesterday,' she finally said with a deep sigh.
" 'I hope nothing has happened to him.'
" 'All day yesterday I thought and thought,' she said, her
eyes full of tears, 'and imagined all kinds of terrible things.
First I thought a wild boar had injured him, then that the
Chechen had carried him off to the mountains. . . . And now it
already seems to me that he doesn't love me.'
" 'Truly, my dear, you couldn't have imagined anything
worse!'
"She burst into tears, and then proudly raised her head,
dried her eyes, and continued:
" 'If he doesn't love me, what prevents him from sending me
home? I am not forcing myself on him. And if this goes on I
shall leave myself; I am not his slave, I am a prince's daughter!'
"I began reasoning with her. 'Listen, Bela, he can't sit here
all the time as if tied to your apron strings. He's a young man
and likes to hunt. He'll go and he'll come back, and if you are
going to mope he'll only get tired of you the sooner.'
" 'You are right,' she replied. 'I shall be gay.' Laughing, she
seized her tambourine and began to sing and dance for me. But
very soon she threw herself on the bed again and hid her face
in her hands.
"What was I to do with her? You see, I had never had
dealings with women. I racked my brains for some way to
comfort her but could not think of anything. For a time we both
were silent. A most unpleasant situation, I assure you!
"At length I said: 'Would you like to go for a walk with me
on the rampart? The weather's fine.' It was September, and the
day was really wonderful, sunny but not too hot, the mountains
as clearly visible as if laid out on a platter. We went out, and in
silence walked up and down the breastwork. After a while she
sat down on the turf, and I sat next to her. It's really funny to
recall how I fussed over her like a nursemaid.
"Our fort was situated on an elevation, and the view from
the parapet was excellent: on one side was a wide open space
intersected by gullies and ending in a forest that stretched all
the way to the top of the mountain ridge, and here and there on
this expanse you could see the smoke of villages and droves of
grazing horses; on the other side flowed a small rivulet
bordered by dense brush that covered the flinty hills merging
with the main chain of the Caucasus. We were sitting in a
corner of a bastion whence we had a perfect view of either
side. As I scanned the landscape, a man riding a grey horse
emerged from the woods and came closer and closer, until he
finally stopped on the far side of the rivulet some hundred
sagenes or so from where we were and began spinning around
on his horse like mad. What the devil was that?
" 'You've younger eyes than I, Bela, see if you can make out
that horseman,' said I. 'I wonder whom he is honouring with a
visit.'
"She looked and cried out: 'It's Kazbich!'
'"Ah, the brigand! Has he come to mock at us?' Now I could
see it was Kazbich: the same swarthy features, and as tattered
and dirty as ever. "That's my father's horse,' Bela said, seizing
my arm; she trembled like a leaf and her eyes flashed. 'Aha, my
little one,' thought I, 'brigand blood tells in you too.'
" 'Come here,' I called to a sentry, 'take aim and knock that
fellow off for me and you'll get a ruble in silver.' 'Yes, Your
Honour, only he doesn't stay still. . . . ' 'Tell him to,' said I
laughing. 'Hey, there!' shouted the sentry waving his arm, 'wait
a minute, will you, stop spinning like a top!' Kazbich actually
paused to listen, probably thinking we wanted to parley, the
insolent beggar! My grenadier took aim ... bang!., and missed,
for as soon as the powder flashed in the pan, Kazbich gave a
jab to the horse making it leap aside. He stood up in his
stirrups, shouted something in his own language, shook his
whip menacingly in the air—and in a flash was gone.
" 'You ought to be ashamed of yourself!' I said to the sentry.
" 'Your Honour! He's gone off to die,' he replied. 'Such a
cussed lot they are you can't kill them with one shot.'
"A quarter of an hour later Pechorin returned from the
chase. Bela ran to meet him and threw her arms around his
neck, and not a single complaint, not a single reproach for his
long absence did I hear. . . . Even I had lost patience with him.
'Sir,' said J, 'Kazbich was on the other side of the river just now
and we fired at him; you could easily have run into him too.
These mountaineers are vengeful people, and do you think he
does not suspect you helped Azamat? I'll wager he saw Bela
here. And I happen to know that a year ago he was very much
attracted by her—told me so himself in fact. Had he had any
hope of raising a substantial kalym he surely would have asked
for her in marriage. . . . ' Pechorin was grave now. "Yes,' he
said, 'we have to be more careful. . . . Bela, after today you
must not go out on the rampart any more.'
"That evening I had a long talk with him; it grieved me that
he had changed toward the poor girl, for besides being out
hunting half the time, he began to treat her coldly, rarely
showing her any affection. She began to waste away visibly,
her face grew drawn, and her big eyes lost their lustre.
Whenever I asked her, 'Why are you sighing, Bela? Are you
sad?' she would reply, 'No.' 'Do you want anything?' 'No!' 'Are
you grieving for your kinsfolk?' 'I have no kinsfolk.' For days
on end you couldn't get more than 'yes' or 'no' out of her.
"I resolved to have a talk with him about this. 'Listen,
Maxim Maximych,' he replied, 'I have an unfortunate
character; whether it is my upbringing that made me like that
or God who created me so, I do not know. I know only that if I
cause unhappiness to others I myself am no less unhappy. I
realize this is poor consolation for them—but the fact remains
that it is so. In my early youth after leaving the guardianship of
my parents, I plunged into all the pleasures money could buy,
and naturally these pleasures grew distasteful to me. Then I
went into society, but soon enough grew tired of it; I fell in
love with beautiful society women and was loved by them, but
their love only spurred on my ambition and vanity while my
heart remained desolate. . . . I began to read and to study, but
wearied of learning too; I saw that neither fame nor happiness
depended on it in the slightest, for the happiest people were the
ignorant and fame was a matter of luck, to achieve which you
only had to be shrewd. And I grew bored. . . . Soon I was
transferred to the Caucasus; this was the happiest time of my
life. I hoped that boredom would not survive under Chechen
bullets—but in vain; in a month I had become so accustomed
to their whine and the proximity of death that, to tell the truth,
the mosquitoes bothered me more, and life became more
boring than ever because I had now lost practically my last
hope. When I saw Bela at my home, when I held her on my lap
and first kissed her raven locks, I foolishly thought she was an
angel sent down to me by a compassionate Providence. . . .
Again I erred: the love of a barbarian girl is little better than
that of a well-born lady; the ignorance and simplicity of the
one are as boring as the coquetry of the other. I still love her, if
you wish, I am grateful to her for a few rather blissful
moments, I am ready to give my life for her, but I am bored
with her. I don't know whether I am a fool or a scoundrel; but
the fact is that I am to be pitied as much, if not more than she.
My soul has been warped by the world, my mind is restless, my
heart insatiable; nothing suffices me: I grow accustomed to
sorrow as readily as to joy, and my life becomes emptier from
day to day. Only one expedient is left for me, and that is to
travel. As soon as possible I shall set out—not for Europe, God
forbid—but for America, Arabia, India— and perhaps I shall
die somewhere on the road! At least I am sure that with the
help of storms and bad roads this last resort will not soon cease
to be a consolation.' He talked long in this vein and his words
seared themselves in my memory for it was the first time I had
heard such talk from a man of twenty-five, and, I hope to God,
the last. Amazing! You probably were in the capital recently;
perhaps you can tell me," the captain went on, addressing me,
"whether the young people there are all like that?"
I replied that there are many who say the same, and that
most likely some of them are speaking the truth; that, on the
whole, disillusionment, having begun like all vogues in the
upper strata of society, had descended to the lower which wear
it threadbare, and that now those who are really bored the most
endeavour to conceal that misfortune as if it were a vice. The
captain did not understand these subtleties, and he shook his
head and smiled slyly:
"It was the French, I suppose, who made boredom
fashionable?"'
"No, the English."
"Ah, so that's it!" he replied. "Of course, they've always
been inveterate drunkards!"
Involuntarily I recalled one Moscow lady who claimed
Byron was nothing more than a drunkard. The captain's
remark, however, was more excusable, for in order to abstain
from drink he naturally tried to reassure himself that all
misfortunes in the world are caused by intemperance.
"Kazbich did not come again," he went on with his story.
"Still, for some unknown reason, I could not get rid of the idea
that his visit had not been purposeless and that he was
scheming something evil.
"Once Pechorin persuaded me to go hunting wild boar with
him. I tried to resist, for what was a wild boar to me, but finally
he did make me go with him. We set out early in the morning,
taking five soldiers with us. Until ten o'clock we poked about
the reeds and the woods without seeing a single animal. 'What
do you say to turning back?' said I. 'What's the use of being
stubborn? You can see for yourself the day has turned out to be
unlucky.' But Grigori Alexandrovich did not want to return
empty-handed in spite of the heat and fatigue. . . . That's how
he was; if he set his mind on something he had to get it; his
mother must have spoiled him as a child. . . . At last around
noon we came upon a cussed boar! . . bang! . . bang! . . but no:
the beast slipped into the reeds . . . yes, it was indeed our
unlucky day. After a bit of a rest we turned for home.
"We rode side by side, in silence, reins hanging loose, and
had almost reached the fort, though we could not yet see it for
the brush, when a shot rang out. We looked at each other, and
the same suspicion flashed through our minds. Galloping in the
direction of the sound, we saw a group of soldiers huddled
together on the rampart, pointing to the field where a horseman
was careering into the distance at breakneck speed with
something white across his saddle, Grigori Alexandrovich
yelled not a whit worse than any Chechen, drew his gun from
its holster and dashed in pursuit, and I after him.
"Luckily, because of our poor hunting luck, our horses were
quite fresh; they strained under the saddle, and with every
moment we gained on our quarry. Finally I recognized
Kazbich, though I could not make out what he was holding in
front of him. I drew abreast of Pechorin and shouted to him:
'It's Kazbich!' He looked at me, nodded and struck his horse
with the crop.
"At last we were within gunshot of Kazbich. Whether his
horse was exhausted or whether it was worse than ours I do not
know, but he was unable to get much speed out of the animal in
spite of his efforts to urge it on. I am sure he was thinking of
his Karagoz then. . . .
"I looked up and saw Pechorin aiming. 'Don't shoot!' I
yelled. 'Save the charge, we'll catch up with him soon enough.'
That's youth for you: always foolhardy at the wrong time. . . .
But the shot rang out and the bullet wounded the horse in a
hind leg; the animal made another dozen leaps before it
stumbled and fell on its knees. Kazbich sprang from the saddle,
and now we saw he was holding a woman bound in a veil in his
arms. It was Bela . . . poor Bela! He shouted something to us in
his own language and raised his dagger over her. . . . There
was no time to waste and I fired at random. I must have hit him
in the shoulder, for his arm suddenly dropped.
When the smoke dispersed there was the wounded horse
lying on the ground and Bela next to it, while Kazbich, who
had thrown away his gun, was scrambling up a cliff through the
underbrush like a cat. I wanted to pick him off but my gun was
unloaded now. We slipped out of the saddle and ran toward
Bela. The poor girl lay motionless, blood streaming from her
wound. The villain! Had he struck her in the heart, it all would
have been over in a moment, but to stab her in the back in the
foulest way! She was unconscious. We tore the veil into strips
and bandaged the wound as tightly as we could. In vain
Pechorin kissed her cold lips; nothing could bring her back to
consciousness.
"Pechorin mounted his horse and I raised her up from the
ground, somehow managing to place her in front of him in the
saddle. He put his arm around her and we started back. After
several minutes of silence, Grigori Alexandrovich spoke:
'Listen, Maxim Maximych, we'll never get her home alive at
this pace.' 'You're right,' I said, and we spurred the horses to
full gallop. At the fort gates a crowd was awaiting us. We
carried the wounded girl gently into Pechorin's quarters and
sent for the surgeon. Although he was drunk, he came at our
summons, and after examining the wound said the girl could
not live more than a day. But he was wrong. . . . "
"She recovered then?" I asked the captain seizing his arm,
glad in spite of myself.
"No," he replied, "the surgeon was wrong only in that she
lived another two days."
"But tell me how did Kazbich manage to kidnap her?"
"It was like this: disobeying Pechorin's instructions, she had
left the fort and gone to the river. It was very hot, and she had
sat down on a rock and dipped her feet into the water. Kazbich
crept up, seized and gagged her, dragged her into the bushes,
jumped on his horse and galloped off. She managed to scream,
however, and the sentries gave the alarm, fired after him but
missed, and that's when we arrived on the scene."
"Why did Kazbich want to carry her off?"
"My dear sir! These Cherkess are a nation of thieves. Their
fingers itch for anything that lies unguarded; whether they need
it or not, they steal— they just can't help themselves! Besides
he had long had his eye on Bela."
"And she died?"
"Yes, but she suffered a great deal, and we too were worn
out watching her. About ten o'clock at night she regained
consciousness; we were sitting at her bedside. As soon as she
opened her eyes she asked for Pechorin. 'I am here, beside you,
my janechka' (that is, 'darling' in our language) he replied
taking her hand. 'I shall die,' she said. We began to reassure her,
saying that the surgeon had promised to cure her without fail,
but she shook her head and turned to the wall. She did not want
to die!
"During the night she grew delirious. Her head was on fire
and every now and then she shook with fever. She was now
talking incoherently about her father and brother; she wanted to
go back to her mountains and home. . . . Then she also talked
about Pechorin, calling him all kinds of tender names or
reproaching him for not loving his janechka any more. . . .
"He listened in silence, his head resting on his hands. But
throughout it all I did not notice a single tear on his lashes;
whether he was actually incapable of weeping or whether he
held himself in check, I do not know. As for myself, I had
never witnessed anything more heartrending.
"By morning the delirium passed. For about an hour she lay
motionless, pale and so weak that her breathing was barely
perceptible. Presently she felt better and began to speak again,
but can you guess of what? Such thoughts can occur only to the
dying. She regretted that she was not a Christian and that in the
world beyond her soul would never meet Grigori
Alexandrovich's, that some other woman would be his
soulmate in paradise. It occurred to me that she might be
baptized before death, but when I suggested this she gazed at
me in indecision for a long time, unable to say a word. At last
she replied that she would die in the faith she had been born.
So the whole day passed. How she changed in that day! Her
pallid cheeks grew sunken, her eyes seemed to become larger
and larger, and her lips were burning. The fever within her was
like red-hot iron.
"The second night came, and we sat at her bedside without
closing an eyelid. She was in terrible agony, she moaned, but as
soon as the pain subsided a little she tried to assure Grigori
Alexandrovich that she was feeling better, urged him to get
some sleep, and kissed his hand and clung to it with her own.
Just before daybreak the agony of death set in, and she tossed
on the bed, tearing off the bandage so that the blood flowed
again. When the wound was dressed she calmed down for a
moment and asked Pechorin to kiss her. He knelt by the bed,
raised her head from the pillow and pressed his lips against
hers, which were now growing chill; she entwined her
trembling arms tightly around his neck as if by this kiss she
wished to give her soul to him. Yes, it was well that she died!
What would have happened to her had Grigori Alexandrovich
left her? And that was bound to happen sooner or later. . . .
"The first half of the next day she was quiet, silent and
submissive in spite of the way our surgeon tortured her with
poultices and medicine. 'My good man!' I protested. 'You
yourself said she would not live, why then all these medicines
of yours?' 'Got to do it, just the same, Maxim Maximych,' he
replied, 'so that my conscience should be at peace.' Conscience
indeed!
"In the afternoon she was tortured by thirst. We opened the
windows, but it was hotter outside than in the room. We placed
ice next to her bed, but nothing helped. I knew that this
unbearable thirst was a sign that the end was approaching, and
I said so to Pechorin. 'Water, water,' she repeated hoarsely,
raising herself from the bed.
"He went white as a sheet, seized a glass, filled it with
water, and gave it to her. I covered my face with my hands and
began to recite a prayer. I can't remember which. Yes, sir, I had
been through a great deal in my time, had seen men die in
hospitals and on the battlefield, but it had been nothing like
this! I must confess that there was something else that made me
sad; not once before her death did she remember me, and I
think I loved her like a father. Well. . . . May God forgive her!
But then who am I that anyone should remember me on his
deathbed?
"As soon as she had drunk the water she felt better, and
some three minutes later she passed away. We pressed a mirror
to her lips, but nothing showed on it. I led Pechorin out of the
room, and then we walked on the fort wall, pacing back and
forth side by side for a long while without uttering a word,
arms crossed behind our backs. It angered me to detect no sign
of emotion on his face, for in his place I should have died of
grief. Finally, he sat down on the ground in the shade and
began to trace some design in the sand with a stick. I began to
speak, wishing to console him, more for the sake of good form
than anything else, you know, whereupon he looked up and
laughed. . . . That laugh sent cold shivers running up and
down my spine. . . . I went to order the coffin.
"I confess that it was partly for diversion that I occupied
myself with this business. I covered the coffin with a piece of
tarlatan I had and ornamented it with some Cherkess silver lace
Grigori Alexandrovich had bought for her.
"Early next morning we buried her beyond the fort, next to
the spot on the riverbank where she had sat that last time; the
small grave is now surrounded by white acacia and elder
bushes. I wanted to put up a cross, but that was a bit awkward,
you know, for after all she was not a Christian. . . . "
"What did Pechorin do?" I asked.
"He was ailing for a long time and lost weight, the poor
chap. But we never spoke about Bela after that. I saw it would
be painful for him, so why should I have mentioned her? Some
three months later he was ordered to join the . . . regiment, and
he went to Georgia. Since then we have not met. Oh yes, I
remember someone telling me recently that he had returned to
Russia, though it had not been mentioned in the corps orders.
In general it takes a long time before news reaches us here."
Here, probably to dispel his sad memories, he launched
upon a long dissertation concerning the disadvantages of
hearing year-old tidings.
I neither interrupted him nor listened.
An hour later it was already possible to continue our
journey. The blizzard had died down and the sky cleared up,
and we set out. On the road, however, I could not help directing
the conversation back to Bela and Pechorin.
"Did you ever happen to hear what became of Kazbich?" I
asked.
"Kazbich? Really, I don't know. I have heard that the
Shapsugi on the right flank of the line have a Kazbich, a bold
fellow who wears a red beshmet, rides at a trot under our fire
and bows with exaggerated politeness whenever a bullet
whistles near him, but I doubt whether it's the same man."
Maxim Maximych and I parted at Kobi, for I took the post
chaise and he could not keep pace with me because of his
heavy baggage. At the time we did not think we would ever
meet again, yet we did, and if you wish, I will tell you about it,
but that is a story in itself. . . . You must admit, however, that
Maxim Maximych is a man you can respect. If you do admit it,
I shall be amply rewarded for my story, long though it may be.