Title: Gooseberries

From early morning the sky had been overcast with clouds; the day was still,
cool, and wearisome, as usual on grey, dull days when the clouds hang low over
the fields and it looks like rain, which never comes. Ivan Ivanich, the veterinary
surgeon, and Bourkin, the schoolmaster, were tired of walking and the fields
seemed endless to them. Far ahead they could just see the windmills of the
village of Mirousky, to the right stretched away to disappear behind the village a
line of hills, and they knew that it was the bank of the river; meadows, green
willows, farmhouses; and from one of the hills there could be seen a field as
endless, telegraph­posts, and the train, looking from a distance like a crawling
caterpillar, and in clear weather even the town. In the calm weather when all
Nature seemed gentle and melancholy, Ivan Ivanich and Bourkin were filled
with love for the fields and thought how grand and beautiful the country was.
"Last time, when we stopped in Prokofyi's shed," said Bourkin, "you were going
to tell me a story."
"Yes. I wanted to tell you about my brother."
Ivan Ivanich took a deep breath and lighted his pipe before beginning his story,
but just then the rain began to fall. And in about five minutes it came pelting
down and showed no signs of stopping. Ivan Ivanich stopped and hesitated; the
dogs, wet through, stood with their tails between their legs and looked at them
mournfully.
"We ought to take shelter," said Bourkin. "Let us go to Aliokhin. It is close by."
"Very well."
They took a short cut over a stubble­field and then bore to the right, until they
came to the road. Soon there appeared poplars, a garden, the red roofs of

granaries; the river began to glimmer and they came to a wide road with a mill
and a white bathing­shed. It was Sophino, where Aliokhin lived.
The mill was working, drowning the sound of the rain, and the dam shook.
Round the carts stood wet horses, hanging their heads, and men were walking
about with their heads covered with sacks. It was wet, muddy, and unpleasant,
and the river looked cold and sullen. Ivan Ivanich and Bourkin felt wet and
uncomfortable through and through; their feet were tired with walking in the
mud, and they walked past the dam to the barn in silence as though they were
angry with each other.
In one of the barns a winnowing­machine was working, sending out clouds of
dust. On the threshold stood Aliokhin himself, a man of about forty, tall and
stout, with long hair, more like a professor or a painter than a farmer. He was
wearing a grimy white shirt and rope belt, and pants instead of trousers; and his
boots were covered with mud and straw. His nose and eyes were black with
dust. He recognised Ivan Ivanich and was apparently very pleased.
"Please, gentlemen," he said, "go to the house. I'll be with you in a minute."
The house was large and two­storied. Aliokhin lived down­stairs in two vaulted
rooms with little windows designed for the farm­hands; the farmhouse was
plain, and the place smelled of rye bread and vodka, and leather. He rarely used
the reception­rooms, only when guests arrived. Ivan Ivanich and Bourkin were
received by a chambermaid; such a pretty young woman that both of them
stopped and exchanged glances.
"You cannot imagine how glad I am to see you, gentlemen," said Aliokhin,
coming after them into the hall. "I never expected you. Pelagueya," he said to
the maid, "give my friends a change of clothes. And I will change, too. But I
must have a bath. I haven't had one since the spring. Wouldn't you like to come
to the bathing­shed? And meanwhile our things will be got ready."
Pretty Pelagueya, dainty and sweet, brought towels and soap, and Aliokhin led
his guests to the bathing­shed.
"Yes," he said, "it is a long time since I had a bath. My bathing­shed is all right,
as you see. My father and I put it up, but somehow I have no time to bathe."
He sat down on the step and lathered his long hair and neck, and the water round
him became brown.
"Yes. I see," said Ivan Ivanich heavily, looking at his head.
"It is a long time since I bathed," said Aliokhin shyly, as he soaped himself
again, and the water round him became dark blue, like ink.
Ivan Ivanich came out of the shed, plunged into the water with a splash, and
swam about in the rain, flapping his arms, and sending waves back, and on the
waves tossed white lilies; he swam out to the middle of the pool and dived, and
in a minute came up again in another place and kept on swimming and diving,
trying to reach the bottom. "Ah! how delicious!" he shouted in his glee. "How

delicious!" He swam to the mill, spoke to the peasants, and came back, and in
the middle of the pool he lay on his back to let the rain fall on his face. Bourkin
and Aliokin were already dressed and ready to go, but he kept on swimming and
diving.
"Delicious," he said. "Too delicious!'
"You've had enough," shouted Bourkin.

They went to the house. And only when the lamp was lit in the large drawing-
room up­stairs, and Bourkin and Ivan Ivanich, dressed in silk dressing­gowns

and warm slippers, lounged in chairs, and Aliokhin himself, washed and
brushed, in a new frock coat, paced up and down evidently delighting in the
warmth and cleanliness and dry clothes and slippers, and pretty Pelagueya,
noiselessly tripping over the carpet and smiling sweetly, brought in tea and jam
on a tray, only then did Ivan Ivanich begin his story, and it was as though he
was being listened to not only by Bourkin and Aliokhin, but also by the old and
young ladies and the officer who looked down so staidly and tranquilly from the
golden frames.
"We are two brothers," he began, "I, Ivan Ivanich, and Nicholai Ivanich, two
years younger. I went in for study and became a veterinary surgeon, while
Nicholai was at the Exchequer Court when he was nineteen. Our father,
Tchimsha­Himalaysky, was a cantonist, but he died with an officer's rank and
left us his title of nobility and a small estate. After his death the estate went to
pay his debts. However, we spent our childhood there in the country. We were
just like peasant's children, spent days and nights in the fields and the woods,
minded the horses, barked the lime­trees, fished, and so on. . . And you know
once a man has fished, or watched the thrushes hovering in flocks over the
village in the bright, cool, autumn days, he can never really be a townsman, and
to the day of his death he will be drawn to the country. My brother pined away
in the Exchequer. Years passed and he sat in the same place, wrote out the same
documents, and thought of one thing, how to get back to the country. And little
by little his distress became a definite disorder, a fixed idea ­­ to buy a small
farm somewhere by the bank of a river or a lake.
"He was a good fellow and I loved him, but I never sympathised with the desire
to shut oneself up on one's own farm. It is a common saying that a man needs
only six feet of land. But surely a corpse wants that, not a man. And I hear that
our intellectuals have a longing for the land and want to acquire farms. But it all
comes down to the six feet of land. To leave town, and the struggle and the
swim of life, and go and hide yourself in a farmhouse is not life ­­ it is egoism,
laziness; it is a kind of monasticism, but monasticism without action. A man
needs, not six feet of land, not a farm, but the whole earth, all Nature, where in
full liberty he can display all the properties and qualities of the free spirit.
"My brother Nicholai, sitting in his office, would dream of eating his own schi,
with its savoury smell floating across the farmyard; and of eating out in the open
air, and of sleeping in the sun, and of sitting for hours together on a seat by the
gate and gazing at the fields and the forest. Books on agriculture and the hints in
almanacs were his joy, his favourite spiritual food; and he liked reading

newspapers, but only the advertisements of land to be sold, so many acres of
arable and grass land, with a farmhouse, river, garden, mill, and mill­pond. And
he would dream of garden­walls, flowers, fruits, nests, carp in the pond, don't
you know, and all the rest of it. These fantasies of his used to vary according to
the advertisements he found, but somehow there was always a gooseberry­bush
in every one. Not a house, not a romantic spot could he imagine without its
gooseberry­bush.
"'Country life has its advantages,' he used to say. 'You sit on the veranda
drinking tea and your ducklings swim on the pond, and everything smells good.
. . and there are gooseberries.'
"He used to draw out a plan of his estate and always the same things were

shown on it: (a) Farmhouse, (b) cottage, (c) vegetable garden, (d) gooseberry-
bush. He used to live meagrely and never had enough to eat and drink, dressed

God knows how, exactly like a beggar, and always saved and put his money into
the bank. He was terribly stingy. It used to hurt me to see him, and I used to give
him money to go away for a holiday, but he would put that away, too. Once a
man gets a fixed idea, there's nothing to be done.
"Years passed; he was transferred to another province. He completed his fortieth
year and was still reading advertisements in the papers and saving up his money.
Then I heard he was married. Still with the same idea of buying a farmhouse
with a gooseberry­bush, he married an elderly, ugly widow, not out of any
feeling for her, but because she had money. With her he still lived stingily, kept
her half­starved, and put the money into the bank in his own name. She had
been the wife of a postmaster and was used to good living, but with her second
husband she did not even have enough black bread; she pined away in her new
life, and in three years or so gave up her soul to God. And my brother never for
a moment thought himself to blame for her death. Money, like vodka, can play
queer tricks with a man. Once in our town a merchant lay dying. Before his
death he asked for some honey, and he ate all his notes and scrip with the honey
so that nobody should get it. Once I was examining a herd of cattle at a station
and a horse­jobber fell under the engine, and his foot was cut off. We carried
him into the waiting­room, with the blood pouring down ­­ a terrible business ­­
and all the while he kept asking anxiously for his foot; he had twenty­five
roubles in his boot and did not want to lose them."
"Keep to your story," said Bourkin.
"After the death of his wife," Ivan Ivanich continued, after a long pause, "my
brother began to look out for an estate. Of course you may search for five years,
and even then buy a pig in a poke. Through an agent my brother Nicholai raised
a mortgage and bought three hundred acres with a farmhouse, a cottage, and a
park, but there was no orchard, no gooseberry­bush, no duck­pond; there was a
river but the water in it was coffee­coloured because the estate lay between a
brick­yard and a gelatine factory. But my brother Nicholai was not worried
about that; he ordered twenty gooseberry­bushes and settled down to a country
life.
"Last year I paid him a visit. I thought I'd go and see how things were with him.

In his letters my brother called his estate Tchimbarshov Corner, or
Himalayskoe. I arrived at Himalayskoe in the afternoon. It was hot. There were
ditches, fences, hedges, rows of young fir­trees, trees everywhere, and there was
no telling how to cross the yard or where to put your horse. I went to the house
and was met by a red­haired dog, as fat as a pig. He tried to bark but felt too
lazy. Out of the kitchen came the cook, barefooted, and also as fat as a pig, and
said that the master was having his afternoon rest. I went in to my brother and
found him sitting on his bed with his knees covered with a blanket; he looked
old, stout, flabby; his cheeks, nose, and lips were pendulous. I half expected him
to grunt like a pig.
"We embraced and shed a tear of joy and also of sadness to think that we had
once been young, but were now both going grey and nearing death. He dressed
and took me to see his estate.
"'Well? How are you getting on?' I asked.
"'All right, thank God. I am doing very well.'
"He was no longer the poor, tired official, but a real landowner and a person of
consequence. He had got used to the place and liked it, ate a great deal, took
Russian baths, was growing fat, had already gone to law with the parish and the
two factories, and was much offended if the peasants did not call him 'Your
Lordship.' And, like a good landowner, he looked after his soul and did good
works pompously, never simply. What good works? He cured the peasants of all
kinds of diseases with soda and castor­oil, and on his birthday he would have a
thanksgiving service held in the middle of the village, and would treat the
peasants to half a bucket of vodka, which he thought the right thing to do. Ah!
These horrible buckets of vodka. One day a greasy landowner will drag the
peasants before the Zembro Court for trespass, and the next, if it's a holiday, he
will give them a bucket of vodka, and they drink and shout Hooray! and lick his
boots in their drunkenness. A change to good eating and idleness always fills a
Russian with the most preposterous self­conceit. Nicholai Ivanich who, when he
was in the Exchequer, was terrified to have an opinion of his own, now
imagined that what he said was law. 'Education is necessary for the masses, but
they are not fit for it.' 'Corporal punishment is generally harmful, but in certain
cases it is useful and indispensable.'
"'I know the people and I know how to treat them,' he would say. 'The people
love me. I have only to raise my finger and they will do as I wish.'
"And all this, mark you, was said with a kindly smile of wisdom. He was
constantly saying: 'We noblemen,' or 'I, as a nobleman.' Apparently he had
forgotten that our grandfather was a peasant and our father a common soldier.
Even our family name, Tchimacha­Himalaysky, which is really an absurd one,
seemed to him full­sounding, distinguished, and very pleasing.
"But my point does not concern him so much as myself. I want to tell you what
a change took place in me in those few hours while I was in his house. In the
evening, while we were having tea, the cook laid a plateful of gooseberries on
the table. They had not been bought, but were his own gooseberries, plucked for

the first time since the bushes were planted. Nicholai Ivanich laughed with joy
and for a minute or two he looked in silence at the gooseberries with tears in his
eyes. He could not speak for excitement, then put one into his mouth, glanced at
me in triumph, like a child at last being given its favourite toy, and said:
"'How good they are!'
"He went on eating greedily, and saying all the while:
"'How good they are! Do try one!'
"It was hard and sour, but, as Poushkin said, the illusion which exalts us is
dearer to us than ten thousand truths. I saw a happy man, one whose dearest
dream had come true, who had attained his goal in life, who had got what he
wanted, and was pleased with his destiny and with himself. In my idea of human
life there is always some alloy of sadness, but now at the sight of a happy man I
was filled with something like despair. And at night it grew on me. A bed was
made up for me in the room near my brother's and I could hear him, unable to
sleep, going again and again to the plate of gooseberries. I thought: 'After all,
what a lot of contented, happy people there must be! What an overwhelming
power that means! I look at this life and see the arrogance and the idleness of
the strong, the ignorance and bestiality of the weak, the horrible poverty
everywhere, overcrowding, drunkenness, hypocrisy, falsehood. . . . Meanwhile
in all the houses, all the streets, there is peace; out of fifty thousand people who
live in our town there is not one to kick against it all. Think of the people who
go to the market for food: during the day they eat; at night they sleep, talk
nonsense, marry, grow old, piously follow their dead to the cemetery; one never
sees or hears those who suffer, and all the horror of life goes on somewhere
behind the scenes. Everything is quiet, peaceful, and against it all there is only
the silent protest of statistics; so many go mad, so many gallons are drunk, so
many children die of starvation. . . . And such a state of things is obviously what
we want; apparently a happy man only feels so because the unhappy bear their
burden in silence, but for which happiness would be impossible. It is a general
hypnosis. Every happy man should have some one with a little hammer at his
door to knock and remind him that there are unhappy people, and that, however
happy he may be, life will sooner or later show its claws, and some misfortune
will befall him ­­ illness, poverty, loss, and then no one will see or hear him, just
as he now neither sees nor hears others. But there is no man with a hammer, and
the happy go on living, just a little fluttered with the petty cares of every day,
like an aspen­tree in the wind ­­ and everything is all right.'
"That night I was able to understand how I, too, had been content and happy,"
Ivan Ivanich went on, getting up. "I, too, at meals or out hunting, used to lay
down the law about living, and religion, and governing the masses. I, too, used
to say that teaching is light, that education is necessary, but that for simple folk
reading and writing is enough for the present. Freedom is a boon, I used to say,
as essential as the air we breathe, but we must wait. Yes ­­ I used to say so, but
now I ask: 'Why do we wait?'" Ivan Ivanich glanced angrily at Bourkin. "Why
do we wait, I ask you? What considerations keep us fast? I am told that we
cannot have everything at once, and that every idea is realised in time. But who
says so? Where is the proof that it is so? You refer me to the natural order of

things, to the law of cause and effect, but is there order or natural law in that I, a
living, thinking creature, should stand by a ditch until it fills up, or is narrowed,
when I could jump it or throw a bridge over it? Tell me, I say, why should we
wait? Wait, when we have no strength to live, and yet must live and are full of
the desire to live!
"I left my brother early the next morning, and from that time on I found it
impossible to live in town. The peace and quiet of it oppress me. I dare not look
in at the windows, for nothing is more dreadful to see than the sight of a happy
family, sitting round a table, having tea. I am an old man now and am no good
for the struggle. I commenced late. I can only grieve within my soul, and fret
and sulk. At night my head buzzes with the rush of my thoughts and I cannot
sleep. . . . Ah! If I were young!"
Ivan Ivanich walked excitedly up and down the room and repeated:
"If I were young."
He suddenly walked up to Aliokhin and shook him first by one hand and then by
the other.
"Pavel Koustantinich," he said in a voice of entreaty, "don't be satisfied, don't let
yourself be lulled to sleep! While you are young, strong, wealthy, do not cease
to do good! Happiness does not exist, nor should it, and if there is any meaning
or purpose in life, they are not in our peddling little happiness, but in something
reasonable and grand. Do good!"
Ivan Ivanich said this with a piteous supplicating smile, as though he were
asking a personal favour.
Then they all three sat in different corners of the drawing­room and were silent.
Ivan Ivanich's story had satisfied neither Bourkin nor Aliokhin. With the
generals and ladies looking down from their gilt frames, seeming alive in the
firelight, it was tedious to hear the story of a miserable official who ate
gooseberries. . . . Somehow they had a longing to hear and to speak of charming
people, and of women. And the mere fact of sitting in the drawing­room where
everything ­­ the lamp with its coloured shade, the chairs, and the carpet under
their feet ­­ told how the very people who now looked down at them from their
frames once walked, and sat and had tea there, and the fact that pretty Pelagueya
was near ­­ was much better than any story.
Aliokhin wanted very much to go to bed; he had to get up for his work very
early, about two in the morning, and now his eyes were closing, but he was
afraid of his guests saying something interesting without his hearing it, so he
would not go. He did not trouble to think whether what Ivan Ivanich had been
saying was clever or right; his guests were talking of neither groats, nor hay, nor
tar, but of something which had no bearing on his life, and he liked it and
wanted them to go on. . . .
"However, it's time to go to bed," said Bourkin, getting up. "I will wish you
good night."

Aliokhin said good night and went down­stairs, and left his guests. Each had a
large room with an old wooden bed and carved ornaments; in the corner was an
ivory crucifix; and their wide, cool beds, made by pretty Pelagueya, smelled
sweetly of clean linen.
Ivan Ivanich undressed in silence and lay down.
"God forgive me, a wicked sinner," he murmured, as he drew the clothes over
his head.
A smell of burning tobacco came from his pipe which lay on the table, and
Bourkin could not sleep for a long time and was worried because he could not
make out where the unpleasant smell came from.
The rain beat against the windows all night long.