Title: Abject Naturalism
Author: Sarah Braunstein

The baby’s father left before the Cesarean incision had fully healed, when it was still a raised red line, tender to the touch, glistening with Vitamin E oil. Perfidy! This from a man who’d once said he’d die without her, who’d written her piles of letters after she’d rejected him, back in graduate school—though graduate school makes it sound more serious than it was. They’d gone to a university to become fiction writers. The degree took two years. During this time, Toni slept with several of her peers but not with the man who eventually became her child’s father. He left letters in her mailbox about how much this pained him. But he was too odd, she thought, terribly intense, with a work ethic that made her ashamed of her own and a burrowing gaze that at once flattered and repelled. He was skinny and had a ponytail. He carried a briefcase. He didn’t die for lack of her, despite what his letter warned.

It wasn’t until a decade had passed, when she was working as a waitress in a small New England city and had just broken up with a bartender named Dusty, when she had given up writing, all early sense of specialness evaporated, that she decided to reach out to him. He was happy to hear from her, her old suitor said, thought about her sometimes, wondered how she was. Was she still writing fiction? Now and then, she lied. He’d always loved her prose style, he told her. He himself had two novel drafts and was finishing a Ph.D. in a city a few hours away. The next weekend, she took a train.

•

The briefcase had become a rugged leather saddlebag. He’d grown into the weirdness, cut his hair and gained some weight, a humanizing softness. She found he was easier to talk to than he’d been when he was twenty-four. There was too much sex at first to get any writing done, but she hoped the urge might return. Being with him, she began to feel that little kick, a sensation in her wrists, her fingers, an idea that shows up first in her palms. It was hard to pinpoint where this urgency resided, or what use she might make of it. She worried that what she really wanted was to be adored—not to write but for him to tell her about what she’d written, to praise it, as he had done in school.

None of that happened, because she got pregnant, an accident that disrupted everything spectacularly. She expected shock, sure, but after the shock—something. Maybe she wanted to be swung around, have her belly kissed, but what he said was this: “I’ve always been so fond of you, but I never wanted to be a father.”

“Fond? But I was your white whale. I was your Beatrice!”

She saw in his expression that she’d made a terrible mistake. All the years of rejecting him, and in the end he dashed. She hadn’t wanted a baby in any conscious way, but the moment she saw the test result she knew—a drilling knowledge—she’d keep it. She could drop certain pretenses now. During her second trimester, she trained to become a phlebotomist. He put some money into an account, for college. He gave her some money, too, but not very much, because he didn’t have very much. “If you do this, Toni, you’re going to be on your own,” he said, and she made him put it in writing.

•

When the baby was only a few weeks old, something lucky happened. A friend had a friend who was renting a cool apartment at the top of a hill in a newly hip part of their city. The friend had gotten into grad school and was moving to Chicago. Wasn’t Toni always talking about finding a new place? Toni couldn’t afford to buy a house, not in that hip neighborhood or anywhere, but the deal on the rent would let her live among the gentrifiers for a while, in this up-and-coming district overlooking the actual ocean.

Toni toured the apartment the next day, the baby in her car-seat carrier, her Cesarean incision smarting but so subtly she could almost forget about it. The landlord was a bearded beatnik, a vestige of another era, who’d bought several ramshackle structures for a song in the sixties and liked to curate an assortment of interesting tenants. Like a rabbit warren, Toni thought, six small rooms, wide wooden floorboards, a tub on avian feet, porcelain sinks and clanking radiators. Nothing was square or plumb, there was no dishwasher, but it was only three blocks to a coffee shop, another five to a wine bar called Moon Under Water, and one day, when the baby was older, they could walk together to the new elementary school, certified green and—because it served students from the housing project at the bottom of the hill, many of whom were immigrants or asylum seekers—impressively diverse.

She and the baby moved in, and she painted the rooms, and the years passed. She stopped doing blood draws, worked her way up to administrative management at the hospital. Her child qualified for Gifted and Talented, a letter that came in the mail said.

•

The child had been given the name Amalie, but a few months after she turned seven she said, in a grave, flinty, fully assured voice, “I want you to call me Nancy.”

Toni refused. Even so, Amalie began to write “Nancy” on the top of her assignments at school. Her friends, even the teacher, began to call her by this wrong name. Amalie liked when people complied. But she was gentle about it, had a savvy sort of guilelessness, with her big eyes and long dark lashes that made Toni think of a cartoon llama. By nine, she was Amalie again. She was studious, quick to anger. She cut the tags out of every shirt. Hated anything nubby. Hated crumbs in the butter. She collected seedpods, which turned to dust on her dresser, and the carapaces of odd bugs.

•

One day, she said she was going out by herself. “I’m old enough,” Amalie said. “I want to jog. Alone.”

“No,” Toni told her.

“I’m ten.”

It was true, ten. Toni’s heart seized whenever she said it—gruesome, how fast a decade could pass.

“I’ll take you for a walk.”

“Alone. And I want to jog. For the children.”

The students in the school district had been given digital wristbands that counted their steps; if one took a certain number of steps a day in America, a child in Africa would be given a tube of peanut paste. That hadn’t sounded right, but a brochure affirmed it.

“It’s the difference between life and death,” Amalie said.

“That’s not quite accurate.”

“It is!” She waved the arm that wore the wristband, then tried another strategy: “It’s safe. Lucien and Violet and Hollis are allowed.”

All true. “You can’t go past the firehouse.”

“I know. I promise.”

She allowed Toni to apply sunscreen to her face. Then Toni led her to the door and said, “Not past the firehouse. Come home in half an hour.” Amalie nodded solemnly, tapped the face of her big black watch.

“Don’t talk to anyone, all right?”

“Why would I talk to someone?”

She ran off, sprinting, as if she might be chased.

When it’s your own baby, every loping shadow in every bush is a sociopath with a jar of baby teeth on his mantel. He lived in the perimeter of her thoughts, this man and his jar. But not really. Only sometimes. She had seen too many serial-killer movies. That bartender she’d dated, Dusty, had a library consisting mostly of books about the Zodiac Killer. She blamed Dusty, in part, for her paranoia, and she also blamed whomever Amalie’s elementary school contracted with for picture day. When you ordered prints from that photography company, it sent you—gratis, like it or not—a demented little card with your child’s face and address, which you were supposed to keep in your wallet and give to the media and the police if your kid disappeared. It actually said this on the back of the card: In the event of your child’s disappearance . . .

Twenty minutes passed. I should not have let her go, she thought. She is too curious. She has no father. No man has imprinted. She’s vulnerable.

But she came back whole. A knock, and when Toni opened the door she found her daughter breathing heavily and standing next to a glossy black telescope on a tripod stand. “A man gave it to me,” she said.

“A man?”

“It needs to be cleaned. We can see Saturn’s rings!”

“Which man?”

“It needs a new—I forget the word.” She wiped her brow. “He told me. He said to look on eBay. He said I could buy the part for cheap.”

•

From the months in which she and Amalie’s father had negotiated the end of their relationship, one conversation stood out. She was newly pregnant—not showing, but her waist was distended, her face puffy—and perhaps for this reason when he said, “I’m in love with another person,” it was so jarring she saw actual stars in her peripheral vision. When she began to cry, he said, “Listen, no. I made that up. That’s not true.”

“It’s not? Is there a woman?”

“No,” he said. “Not really.”

“No, or not really?”

“I don’t want a family. I don’t want a wife or a child. I want my central relationship to be with texts.”

“Texts?”

“I need to organize my life around my work.”

“You’re in love with a book?”

“Not a book.”

Soon, he got a teaching job at a prestigious university. Then he began to publish his novels. Toni read them in hardcover at the public library, in a room full of homeless people, the body odor amplifying her sense of punishment. She thought of the books as his ex-wives. He was prolific. No one who resembled Toni or Amalie appeared in the pages. The novels had bold, handsome covers and often featured protagonists who were writers themselves. How did he get away with that? She had been told in school not to do that, to stop being so clever.

Amalie knew her father was an author. She spoke of him as an abstract, a concept—“my biological father”—as if she were the child of a sperm donor. She was not especially curious, not yet. But one day she would read his books. That was coming. Toni did not like to think about it. She didn’t seek out his reviews, though she could read them without having a panic attack, if she happened upon them in the Times or in waiting-room magazines. She’d stopped Googling him long ago, after she read an article in their alumni magazine with the headline “The Author’s Retreat: A Place for Plotting.” His living room had wall-to-wall bookshelves, a giant window through which you could see a span of darkly pink extraplanetary sky, and Barcelona chairs. She felt immensely jealous. To be free of children is truly to be free, she knew that now.

•

She found the telescope guy on the street that ran parallel to theirs, Beckett Street. Amalie had pointed out where he lived. It was a solid square house, shabby but not dingy, a single-family. A small yard, no landscaping but a lone pot of geraniums on the front porch. When Amalie was at school, Toni went to confront him. “Confront” is too strong a word. She had a point to make.

A doorbell coated in rust. She knocked instead and he came to the door. Before he spoke, she could tell he was a local, one who would be displaced. He had a wide, ruddy, pleasant face. Mid- to late sixties. Gray-brown hair, white at the temples, and a pair of black glasses over his T-shirt collar, pulling it down so she could see his chest hair, silver and feathery.

“You gave my daughter a telescope—” she began.

“A telescope?” He raised a finger, tapped his lips. She thought he was going to deny it, but he said, “Annie? Emily?,” and now she wished for a fake name.

“Amalie.”

He snapped his fingers. “Right, yes, Amalie. Did you get it to work? It needs a new—”

“What message are you sending her?”

He blinked.

“I’m sure you don’t mean any harm. But consider the precedent.” She spoke with effortful neutrality. “You sent her the message that it’s safe to talk to men she doesn’t know.”

“Did I?”

“And it might have been safe in this case. That doesn’t mean next time, or on the next street, it will be.”

He took the glasses off his shirt, put them on. “I think you might have misunderstood. I was only setting out a bunch of trash on the curb. She skipped by. It was going to the dump, right? I told her she could take it or it was trash.”

He spoke carefully but without condescension; she could hear years of smoking.

“I figured a kid her age might like a thing like that, you know? That’s all I did. I’m not a predator.”

She did not like that word: “skipped.” “Skipped,” “predator,” these words she didn’t approve of, but then he smiled and she saw his crowded teeth, the white of bleaching products.

“Thirty seconds, I swear. Our whole interaction.” He held up his right hand. She began to feel sheepish.

“It’s my policy that you’re dangerous,” she told him. “Until I have evidence to the contrary. It’s not personal. Do you have a daughter?”

“A niece.”

“How old?”

“Grown. But she’s fine. She works in security. I’m Marco.”

“Toni.”

“You want to come in? Cup of joe?”

She saw into the house behind him, plush red seventies-thick carpet, a couch with wooden armrests and yellow-daisy upholstery. She said she had to go to work. She’d be late. She was walking away but then turned back and said, “She was jogging, for the record. Amalie doesn’t skip.”

“Roger that,” he said, saluting her.

•

She was paranoid. She was projecting. She met at the wine bar with her friends Lucy and Katherine, who were a decade older, and they told her she had overreacted, but she cut them off—“I know, I know, I’m crazy.”

“Not crazy!” they said in unison, each stroking one of her hands, which lay flat on the table. She sat upright, like a person taking a pledge, like it was a deposition.

“Lots of mothers go through this,” Katherine said, stroking. “When Sadie got boobs, it fucked me up. I wept in the changing room at Macy’s.”

Lucy said, “My sister had an actual breakdown when Coco got her period.”

“Amalie’s not going through puberty.”

“Of course she is.”

“A puberty of will,” Toni said, and they told her it was the same thing, all of a piece. But Amalie was so little-girlish, her body concave and lithe in the way of a child. She didn’t even need deodorant yet.

“It’s happening,” they promised her.

“I’m not afraid of her period.”

“Boobs are triggering, too.”

“They get those nubs.”

“Pubes.”

“Right, that’s the order.”

“You sound like perverts,” Toni said, “worse than any man,” and they laughed but she was not joking, there was something sick in this hypervigilance, hungry and wistful and canny and boundaryless—and suddenly she felt shame for how she had treated the telescope guy.

•

The next day, she dropped by again. She had only ten minutes to spare before she was due at work. Today, his T-shirt was gray. Salt-and-pepper shadow on his face, darkest on his chin. “I was rude,” she said.

“It’s understandable.”

She looked hard at him. “You’re too nice.”

“You’re a mother. That’s how I see it. You’re allowed to overreact.”

She felt he’d accepted her apology before she’d fully made it. She said it was true, yes, she’d overreacted, she was a single mom—but she wished she’d been allowed to apologize fully.

“Coffee?” He pantomimed a mug in his hand, a swig. She saw an agility in his body, lightness despite his size. “You want to apologize inside?”

“I’ll be late to work.”

He dropped the mug. “Where’s that?”

“The hospital.”

“Doctor?”

“Administration.”

“Forms,” he said sympathetically. “I don’t envy you.”

“They’re not bad. I used to take people’s blood.”

“You prefer forms to blood?”

“The money’s better.”

He said he was retired. But once he’d built houses. “I messed up my back bad. A beam fell on me. Traction for three months. I sued a giant. Talk about forms.”

“I’m sorry to hear that.”

“It turned out O.K.” He made the rubbing gesture with his fingertips that meant money. He added, “I barely limp. I’m not addicted to pills. Only Tylenol, swear on my mother’s grave. No one can believe it. Show a doctor at your hospital my X-ray. Tell him only Tylenol and see what he says. Or she. Tell me what she says.”

Lightness in her chest when she drove away. John Lennon singing. In the middle of the night, he calls her name.

•

That night, she said to Amalie, “Never tell a man you don’t know your name.”

“What? I never would tell a man that.”

“No, I mean never give your name to a man you don’t know.”

Amalie thought about it. She didn’t speak.

Toni said, “Did you tell the man who gave you the telescope your name?”

“No.”

“I think you did.”

Amalie’s expression didn’t change. She turned her head to the side, like a rabbit listening. Toni didn’t say anything more—the weirdness of her syntax felt like warning enough.

•

A few days later, a package arrived. It was the telescope part. He had bought them a present—had figured out where they lived. It wouldn’t have been hard. She held it, her heart beating in her neck. It had been a long time since she’d received mail from a man. This was just a piece of square plastic with an angled mirror, but it returned something to her. And then Amalie walked into the room and said, “I know I should have asked you first. You were in the shower. I found it on a Web site. It was easy. Just four ninety-nine. I used your credit card.”

Her credit card?

“Amalie! That’s—that’s—” The only word that came to mind was “criminal.” “That’s not O.K.,” she said, but the girl’s face remained placid, indifferent, and so Toni said, “That’s criminal, Amalie—criminal,” and saw a flash of surprise.

•

This time, she had forty-five minutes before she had to go to work. He seemed surprised to see her. The white T-shirt again, and he was clean-shaven. He invited her in. His kitchen had an old linoleum floor, a white countertop speckled with inky gold. All the appliances were fifty years old except for the coffee machine, which was the kind that ruins the environment with its plastic pods. A Brooklynite would gut the kitchen in a second. They sat down in green molded-plastic chairs.

“You really had a fire under you,” he said.

“I’m prone to worrying.”

“You’re suspicious. That’s a good thing. My mother was never suspicious. Not a whit.”

“A whit?” She liked that word.

“Not a crumb. It was different back then. I don’t think our mothers worried so much.”

He was brought up here, in this house, him and his sister and his mother. He could not imagine his mother tracking down a neighbor and yelling about danger.

“I didn’t yell.”

“You didn’t.”

“I hope I didn’t.”

“You didn’t yell—my mother yelled. But she had to. She had no idea where I went. Who I talked to. We were all just let loose. All the neighborhood kids. We got back in time for dinner, mostly.”

He handed her a bag of potato chips. She took a few.

“No camp, no programs. We were wild. Scrappy. Same exact place. Not too long ago.”

She said it might as well be a different country now—the watching eyes, the schedules, the helmets and knee pads and consent forms.

When he got up to brew another cup, she saw evidence of the injury, but faintly; it was more a hitch than a limp. He moved gracefully, poured a mug of water into the machine’s reservoir. He was tall, on the edge of burly, but had a way of gliding. She sat close enough to the fridge that she could read its magnets—there was one that said “A minute on the lips, a lifetime on the hips.” It held a reminder card from the dentist. She read his last name. Now she could Google him. She felt sad that she could Google him. She wouldn’t. She’d spare one person in her life.

•

That same day, driving to pick up Amalie from aftercare, Toni saw children playing in the street at the bottom of the hill. How had she failed to account for them, these dozens of children who parted to make way for her car? They rode their bikes in the streets, helmetless. Of course, Toni did not judge the parents. These families brought different traditions and practices. Many had fled true danger. But why had she not thought of them when she and Marco were talking?

Amalie’s elementary school was diverse, dozens of languages spoken there, but the playground nearest their house was generally occupied by white children. Once, she’d asked Amalie, “Do the African children play by themselves at school?” Amalie considered the question for a good while. All she said was “Halima is really annoying.”

•

On the fifth night, Toni broke down and gave Amalie the telescope part. Amalie tried to install it, but it turned out that she’d purchased the wrong size—it was too big for the hole. “Serves you right,” Toni said tenderly, and gave her a squeeze. Amalie was so disappointed she cried. She hardly ever cried. She looked so helpless, like a kid lost at a fair, shamed by the spectacle, adorable despite every intention. Toni measured the telescope several times, got her credit card, and ordered the correct part. She paid for expedited shipping.

“Three to five days?” the girl sniffled, and Toni said yes, three to five, and Amalie let her mother wipe her eyes, and let her do a French braid and tie a yellow ribbon at the end.

Later that night, Toni called Lucy and said, “I’m not going to Google the telescope guy.”

“What if he’s an offender?”

“He’s not. I trust my gut.”

She Googled him. His full name, city, and state. She found a White Pages listing with his address, which she already knew. An obituary for a woman who’d died a decade ago, who was perhaps his mother . . . yes, Helen Lorraine, survived by two children, Marco and Loretta, and a granddaughter. She was described as a homemaker and a long-standing member of a bridge club. Toni saw Marco’s features in the woman’s square, serious face. No crime, no red flag. She closed the computer. She imagined a group of boys roaming the neighborhood; she put them in clothes like they wore in “The Outsiders,” greaser gear, Levi’s and dingy white T-shirts. Poor white boys. Working-class boys before they worked. It was classist to be turned on, she thought, but also not to be.

•

Now she had two hours until she had to be at work. This time, he brought them coffee in his living room. It had ancient carpeting and furniture, but the TV was new, as was his armchair. “A smart chair.” He showed her the hidden panel—a hatch for power, USB, a dial for lumbar support. There was even a refrigerated compartment where one could store drinks. “From the manufacturer of those Japanese toilets. You know those toilets?”

She did. There was an elaborate toilet at Yosaku, her favorite restaurant in town; it caressed you with a stream of warm water, a sensation so much like urination that she felt dirtier for having pressed the button. He said he’d never tried sushi but he liked Japanese gadgets. Looking at them in magazines, knowing how they worked—he liked that. He was thinking of ordering a toilet for himself.

Toni said, “We ordered the telescope part. She can hardly wait.” He smiled. He had an uncomplicated warmth to his face, like an elementary-school teacher. They drank more coffee and he served a sleeve of Ritz and told her about a kid called Tato, a friend back in the day, two streets over.

“What kind of name is that?”

“Short for Potato. His real name was Richard.”

The neighborhood wonder. At nineteen, he went to Hollywood to try his luck and actually landed a part on a soap opera, a real part. Everyone followed the show vigilantly, all its twists, cheered whenever he came onscreen.

“The day after Thanksgiving, Tato died of a drug overdose in a shitty motel on Sunset Boulevard. Died in real life. Not on the show. Some of the guys kept watching anyway. They got hooked on it. ‘Westerly.’ ” He hummed its theme song, which she vaguely recognized. She wanted to know who else didn’t survive their adolescence. He shook his head.

“That’s no talk for you,” he said.

“I can take it.”

He wanted to tell her—she could see a hunger to reminisce. She liked the way he told her the scary bits so calmly.

“There was Jimmy Tampuco. Overdosed in his basement. Your girl won’t do drugs. I can tell she won’t. Oh, and Sissy LaDuke. That was sad. She won the jump-rope contest in elementary school. She was drunk. That might make you feel better.”

“Drunk in elementary school?”

“In the crash, later. Your girl won’t drink. Amalie isn’t like that.”

“How do you know?”

“You can tell,” he said. “She’s—” He paused. “Clean. Maybe that’s not the right way to say it.” She pictured a white sheet on a clothesline, shuddering in the wind. She liked that he said it, even as she understood it was problematic, implying as it did that there could be dirty children. And what would make a child dirty? And whose fault would it be?

•

She let Amalie out on her own again. She didn’t return with a gift this time, swore she hadn’t spoken to a soul. Toni felt better, proud of herself for overcoming her paranoia. She let her out the next day, too. But that night something happened that scared her all over again. At two in the morning, Toni woke up, got up to pee. As a matter of habit, she poked her head into Amalie’s bedroom, and saw her bed was empty. She searched the apartment, calling for her. Thought to call the police but could not find her phone. It was not on the nightstand. Or in her purse. She called louder, ran to the front door, saw Amalie in the yellow beam of a street light, in her tie-dyed nightgown, an arm stretched to the sky. She held an illuminated object in her hand, moved it as a person sways a lighter at a concert.

“What are you doing?”

Amalie spun, clutched the phone to her chest. “Don’t be mad. It was free.”

“I couldn’t find you!”

An app, she explained. You held your phone to the night sky and it named all the stars for you. You looked at the sky through the screen, as if the phone were a window, and each star was labelled, and dotted lines connected the stars into constellations, which were labelled, too.

“But you can’t leave the house in the middle of the night! You scared me, honey!”

“I was ten feet away,” Amalie said steadily. She came to her, took her hand, said, “The app was free, Mama.”

“You don’t know who might be roaming around at night,” Toni said, when she’d got Amalie back into bed, when she was sitting on the edge of the bed, tucking her in again.

Amalie said, “What do you mean? No one was out there. Who are you talking about?,” and since that was not a question Toni could answer she began to name the things she would take away from the girl if she did not comply. Screen time. Jogging. The special magnifying box into which she put live bugs and her bloody scabs.

•

The sunroom next. He was showing her the house in this way, a cup of coffee in each spot. Wicker furniture with firm, pink-pastel cushions. A ceiling fan spun brown parchment blades. Looks exotic, he told her, but it came from Lowe’s. A bookshelf contained spy thrillers and Stephen King. The Danielle Steels had been his mother’s. He gazed at her in a way that was—well, that was loving. That word felt accurate. How would she explain that to Lucy and Katherine? She would tell them straight: he looks at me like he loves me. But they would burst out laughing, because she wouldn’t be able to say it straight. From brain to mouth, in that nanosecond, it would become distorted with irony. She could only think it unironically. So she did. He looks at me like he loves me. She felt her cheeks grow warm. She could feel her heart in her ears, as if she’d plugged them. His mouth did not frighten her. Did she want to kiss it? Maybe not yet. But she would contentedly share a straw with him, or an apple.

She told him some more things about herself. She told him her childhood fantasy was to become a writer. She’d written stories on a secondhand typewriter about people who were way worse off than her, and on the basis of these she’d got a scholarship to the state university, and then to graduate school.

“What did you want to write?”

“Scary things.”

“Like Stephen King?”

“Scarier.”

“Than that?”

He looked at her like such a thing was not possible.

“A different kind of scary. Funny, too.”

“Dark comedy?”

“I couldn’t do it. I quit.”

“Of course not,” he said, chuckling. “You’re a nice person.” Then he said, “But why not?”

“I guess I didn’t have the discipline. And I could never end things right.”

“Huh.”

“Amalie’s father is a writer,” she offered next, because then she wouldn’t wonder anymore how much she would tell him. “He’s famous. In certain circles, I guess. He’s written many books. He’s won awards. I met him in graduate school.”

Marco did not look impressed by this or ask his name.

“Does he see her?” he wanted to know.

“He put money in an account for her college. I asked him to give up his parental rights.”

“And he did it?”

“In a snap.”

“A snap?”

She snapped her fingers.

“A fool,” Marco said, thumped a fist like a judge’s gavel on his broad thigh.

Marco told her he’d come close to having a kid. A long time ago. He’d been in love with a woman named Diane. She worked in a sandwich shop owned by her father. When he picked her up after a shift, she smelled like spicy meat. She had extremely long hair. Crystal Gayle hair. Did Toni know her? The old country singer? Hair nearly to the floor, long and straight, like a cape. Diane kept it in a braid at work, wrapped all around her head, kind of like a turban, because you couldn’t let a customer find hair like that in a sandwich.

“Talk about a health-code violation. She washed it twice a month. It took twelve hours to dry. Hey, can you find me a picture of her? Of Crystal Gayle? I’d like to see her.”

She called up a photograph of the country singer from the phone sitting on her lap. He looked at it for a while, then returned the phone and said, “We thought about having a kid. It was on the table. But she didn’t want to. That’s what she decided in the end. It was the right decision for her. I respect her for it.”

Their stories had a kind of symmetry, were inversions of each other. That’s what he was telling her. The room overlooked a fenced-in back yard. There was a hammock on a metal stand, an overgrown brick patio. The light was a deep, dappled green that made her eyelids and limbs grow heavy, a spontaneous fatigue like Dorothy in the field of poppies.

•

The newspapers began to speak of a housing crisis. Her landlord always swore he wouldn’t raise the rent. “Not on you and Amalie. Never would.” One day, he added, “But when I die—well, you’re on your own, my friend.”

“You can leave me this house in your will,” she’d replied, a joke, but his face got serious and he told her it was going to his son. They both knew his son would sell to a developer or a Brooklynite. Her landlord was getting older. He’d had a knee replacement and might need to do a hip. It struck her, one day, that she thought more about her landlord’s health than about her own parents’.

Young couples kept moving into the neighborhood. They drove Subarus or Audis or Teslas or vintage, gas-guzzling Mercedes-Benzes in white or butter yellow. “I work remotely,” everyone said. Or “I’m a consultant,” no further explanation, as if she should know what that meant. Young chefs, screenwriters, environmental lawyers, medical-marijuana growers, beer brewers, everyone so exceedingly passionate, alert with creativity, everyone—all of a sudden—younger than her. She felt like a fraud in their company. She only dressed like a member of the creative class.

Once, her imagination had been like a puppy that wanted to lick everything. In college, she didn’t go out on the weekends, preferring to stay in and write. Late at night, she would read what she’d written to the girls who remained in the dorm, who’d show her the goosebumps on their arms as proof of the excellence of the story. She didn’t get the same reception in her M.F.A. program. The first fiction she shared was about a girl who shoplifts a box of tampons. It’s meant to be a rite of passage, but she gets caught and arrested and bleeds everywhere. The story ends with the cops calling her mother. The girls in the dorm would have had goosebumps. But her teacher stared at the place where the ceiling met the wall, tapped his long fingers on the table, said, “There is so much writing that could be good but isn’t.”

A long pause.

“Why is this?” he asked the class.

They guessed: Passive voice? Poor characterization? Disharmony between form and content?

“No,” he said. “It’s because it doesn’t take responsibility for itself.”

•

The new telescope part arrived, the right part. She hoped. Toni gave it to Amalie after dinner. The girl squealed and raced to the telescope, but she couldn’t get it to fit. It seemed to be the correct size but it wouldn’t slide in. They searched for a button, a lever, some trick. Went online. There were people on YouTube demonstrating every conceivable thing in the universe but not how to make this eyepiece fit in this telescope, and by then it was getting late.

“Time for bed, honey. We’ll do it tomorrow.”

“We’re close. Please!” She had written a list of features of the night sky on a piece of notebook paper and held it up now, her forehead clenched. “Tomorrow, it’s going to rain. Tomorrow, there’s an eighty-per-cent chance of rain.”

“The sky isn’t going anywhere, is it?”

Amalie began to cry but recovered quickly. She wiped her face with a handful of toilet paper, rubbed her eyes, and took stoic, heartbreaking breaths, like a businesswoman in a bathroom stall. Her restraint destroyed Toni. Amalie fell asleep with the tattered edge of her old security blanket gripped in her hand.

Toni would get her girl’s telescope working. Wake her before dawn. That was the idea—to surprise her, wake her up, show her the sky. But she couldn’t figure it out. She played with it for a while, drank a glass of wine, finally gave up.

•

Once not long ago Toni had a dream in which she was renting the same apartment but the other bedroom, Amalie’s orange room, was an office full of Ikea furniture. No Amalie. She had not been born. The walls were white. The books in the office were arranged by color, a trend Toni scorned in waking life. That was the whole dream. She had woken flooded with dread. Amalie! On the nightstand, she’d spotted proof of the child’s existence—a drawing the girl had recently done, a bird with a deformed beak. Evidently, Amalie had predicted her mother’s critique, because upon giving her the drawing Amalie had said, “Its beak is supposed to be like that.” She’d been reading about the animal deformities following Chernobyl. All kinds of deformities, she explained. “Weird beaks on the birds. Extra legs on deer. Twisty spines. Long necks. No necks.”

“No necks?”

“Anything can go wrong,” her daughter said brightly.

Now Toni turned on the bedside light. She looked at that bird drawing. The bird’s beak was twisted in a way that made it seem like it would be difficult for it to eat. It had lopsided, querying eyes. Then Toni had an idea. If she thought about it too much, she wouldn’t do it. She got out of bed. She left a note on the kitchen counter. “Ran an errand! Back shortly. Go back to sleep. love, Mom.” Amalie wouldn’t wake, hardly ever woke in the night. It would only be five minutes. Ten, tops. That episode in the street had been an anomaly.

•

She saw herself from above—a woman jogging. A woman in black leggings and a slouchy gray sweatshirt and no bra, holding a telescope out in front of her like a baby that is not her responsibility. Help. There were no lights on in his house. She’d hoped that he would be reading in bed or playing solitaire downstairs in the special chair, which had a removable desktop. Then she could say, I remembered you’re a night owl. I saw a light.

In the darkness, her fist made a frightened sound. Finally, the light above her head came on. His face was reddish, cleanly shaved, his hair in surprising disarray and longer than she’d expected.

“Toni, you all right?”

“Hello, Marco. I’m fine. I’m really sorry to wake you. I need to get this thing to work. I can’t get the new part in, and tomorrow it’s going to rain. There’s a storm coming.”

He shook his head. He rubbed his right eye with the heel of his hand.

“You apologize too much.”

He was wearing a blue velour robe. She could see the soft rise of his pectorals, the outline of his abdomen under the robe. He looked at the telescope and frowned. Looked at the night sky. He didn’t look at her.

“Come in,” he said finally. They didn’t go far—just into the foyer. He bent down, careful to keep his robe closed, and examined the telescope. There was a hidden button on the base.

“Here,” he said. “Underneath. See?” The part slid in, easy as pie, once you pushed this button. “Ta-da.”

He stood, smiling. She felt suddenly embarrassed. She said, “I hope you don’t misunderstand.”

“Misunderstand?”

“It’s late.”

He looked at her squarely.

“I just want to make Amalie happy. I want to surprise her before daybreak,” she said.

“My doorstep, in the middle of the night. Don’t misunderstand?”

“You gave it to her. Where was I supposed to go?”

He tightened his robe. “You want a cup, Toni?”

“I won’t go back to sleep.” She shook her head. “I should go. She might wake up.” But she was only a block away. Two minutes. Less if she jogged. She had left the note. “One cup. You have decaf?”

They sat together on the stoop, mugs in their hands. It felt less rule-breaking on the stoop. She wasn’t in a man’s house, only outside her own. They watched the spastic display of moths in the street light. An upstairs light came on in the house across the street. Light from these two sources fell onto Marco’s face like powder, softening his complexion. She admitted that she’d Googled him.

“I’m flattered you did that. Not too newsworthy, you see.”

“I read your mother’s obituary.”

“You did? I wrote that.”

“It was lovely,” she said softly. That wasn’t quite true. She had felt nothing of the woman’s essence. But the writing was clear, said what it meant, and that was more of a feat than anyone realized.

“What about you, Toni? What would I find if I looked you up?”

She felt mildly disappointed that he hadn’t. “Nada.”

He leaned back, clasped his hands behind his head, so that his elbow lightly touched her shoulder. “Your parents are alive?”

“Nominally.”

“I don’t know what that means.”

“They fight all day.”

“Too bad,” he said, bringing his hands back to his lap. “A shame.”

In graduate school, she had written a story loosely based on her parents, in which a couple has to contend with a skunk in the basement—their failure to contain the animal leads them to pitch a tent in the back yard. The same teacher said the story suffered from abject naturalism. The plausible was described plausibly, credible things occurred in credible order. Toni felt this was the worst thing that could be said about a story, the worst way you could live a life.

Marco went on. “I’m dyslexic. That’s why it took me so long to write the obituary. That’s why I didn’t graduate from high school. I could only read in a totally silent room, and then it was exhausting.”

He pointed to the lit room on the second floor of the house across the street. “There,” he said. “That room.” The house they faced had a sporty Volvo in the driveway, an amazing garden, raised beds and trellises. He gestured to the telescope. “You should look, but from upstairs. We have to be higher. You can see the book titles.”

“You can?”

“And their moles.”

“Jesus, Marco.”

“You don’t approve?” He kept his eyes on the window. “I gave it away, anyhow.”

“That’s what you were using it for? Spying on your neighbors?”

He laughed. “What—you’re allowed, but I’m not?”

What did he mean, allowed ? She thought of her own girl, alone at home. She said, “You have a niece, Marco.”

“I do.”

“She works in security.”

“She does.”

She kissed him. First a peck, then deeper. He kissed her back. He did not seem surprised to be kissing her, nor did he hesitate. Beneath the coffee, his mouth tasted pleasantly herbal. They brought the telescope upstairs. There was wainscoting in the bedroom. There were those old-fashioned on-off light switches, with two black buttons, one above the other, that make such a satisfying sound when you press them.

•

When she got home, she found Amalie in the exact same spot, drooling on her pillow. All that time, which felt enormous, like hours, had actually been fifty-two minutes.

She had put her eye to the telescope, allowed Marco to adjust it. The man across the street had been reading a book in bed, a slim light clamped to the headboard. He had curly blond hair. A person asleep next to him. A lump with black hair. Toni did not know if the lump was a man or a woman. The reading man occasionally, absently, rubbed his genitals. The book he was reading was called “Screenwriting.” That was it. Nothing else happened. The dullness of the scene, the abject naturalism, aroused her.

“This is what you do, Marco? Watch them?”

“Sometimes.”

“And what else?”

“What else?”

The whole time, Amalie slept. Now Toni shook her shoulder until she sat up, still asleep. A hank of hair clung to the side of her mouth. She wasn’t awake yet, her eyes strange and empty, like a ghost who would haunt this place when it became a condo, and Toni couldn’t bear it, said, “Baby, baby, wake up.” Amalie let herself be pulled up. Her nightgown was hitched into her white underpants. Toni pulled it down and pulled the hair from her mouth, led her into the hall. Only when she opened the front door, when cool air rushed at them and she saw the telescope standing in the street, pointing virtuously upward, did she really wake up.

“I fixed it.”

Amalie made a sound. A joyful yowl, feline, so quick and piercing that something screeched back in alarm. Then she surged for the telescope, took it in her hands. She knew where everything was up there. Her patience was enormous. Her focus.

•

She was a polite kid, considerate—she didn’t forget Toni.

“You want a turn?”

“Later, honey. Not now. You look now.”

Toni felt strange. She’d sneaked out like a teen-ager and come home different, out of joint, as if she’d lost her virginity.

“I see a satellite,” Amalie announced, but Toni’s focus was earthbound. She was planning something in her head. She felt it all there, laid out. A structure she could borrow. A new sense of urgency.

“I see Mars.”

“That’s amazing, honey.”

He would be another set of eyes. He would keep an eye. The moment she decided, she decided everything. Where she’d put her bureau, which room Amalie would get. Where Toni would set up a desk. Where she would try one more time. Slow down, she told herself, but then she thought, Why should I slow down? She had been too humble, too modest. The edges of the sky lightened. A seam appeared in the horizon, and they went inside. In the apartment, Amalie hugged Toni around the waist—hugged her hard, encircling her totally, the way she had as a toddler. She made a move to return to bed, but Toni took her wrist and said no.

“No?”

“Let’s end the night in a doughnut shop.”

“It’s the morning already!”

But that was what Toni wanted. Like in graduate school. Like the early-morning diner after the first time you’ve been with someone. Coffee after a hookup. So that she could linger in this state, so that Amalie would remember it longer. They drove to the Christmas-themed doughnut shop off Exit 5 and Toni ordered half a dozen, what the hell, to celebrate.

“To celebrate? What are we celebrating?” They sat across from each other in a hard plastic yellow booth. On a shelf above them, several mechanical Santas were frozen in hip gyrations.

“You!” Toni said, lifting her coffee.

The girl made a doubtful face, blinked her red-rimmed eyes. There was still a faint indentation around her eye socket, from the telescope.

“You and the cosmos, honey. The sky. That’s what.”

“Oh,” Amalie said, taking a large bite.

Toni allowed Amalie a few sips of coffee. Sugar granules sparkled on her cheeks. People came and went. Mostly old men.

Toni said, “We should thank the man who gave you the telescope.”

“I thought I wasn’t allowed to talk to him.”

“I checked him out.”

“You did? When?”

An elderly man in a stained shirt and green-tinted glasses—looking toward Amalie—smiled and pressed a button on a Santa across the room, the tallest Santa, who began to gyrate and sing. He was trying to please her, the only child in the place. Amalie winced like a woman with a hangover, looked out the window. The Santa crackled dementedly.

Toni said, “We should give him a doughnut.”

“Him?”

She thought Toni meant the man who started up the Santa.

“Marco.”

“Wait. Who’s that?”

“The man who gave you the telescope. His name is Marco.”

Amalie stopped eating. She blinked her long lashes.

“Why?”

“It would be nice.”

Amalie thought about it. “A lemon,” she said finally, looking into the box at the remaining doughnuts. Lemon were her least favorite. Then she tapped her watch, reminded her mother it was a school day. As they were leaving, she passed the man who had made the Santa dance, and he put his hand out, the way one does for a high five, a meaty palm, but Amalie sailed by, did not pause.

Amalie my anomaly, her mother thought. Good girl. Just like that. In the parking lot, a big black bird tore at a garbage bag. Empty cans skidded across the pavement. A storm was coming, like Amalie had said. They were stuffed to the gills with sugar and caffeine. The school nurse would call in two hours. By that point, Toni would have called in sick herself, would be home napping. But before the nap. Before Amalie throws up in the coatroom. While the sky is so lovely and strange and their glucose levels have not yet plummeted—she feels entitled to everything she wants. Ambition is ascendant. Danger everywhere, but it’s not—look at that—in this story. In this story, no one lays a finger on any child. The wind lifts Amalie’s hair. Toni lets her ride in the front seat. When she starts the car, the radio is already playing the right song, Freddie Mercury announcing a homicide, and they sing together, and it ends just when she pulls up to the school, as if God himself had set the needle down. ♦