Title: Alisa
Author: Lyudmila Ulitskaya

Alisa belonged to the rare breed of people who know with perfect certainty what they want and what they don’t want under any circumstances.

By an early age, the mixed blood—half Baltic, half Polish—she inherited from her mother had cooled off all Alisa’s passionate impulses, and the fear of falling into another person’s power was stronger than all the other fears proper to women: of solitude, of childlessness, of poverty. Her mother, Martha, who had married an Army general before the war, a marriage that resulted in Alisa, had to bury her general when she was still young. For the rest of her life, she was always passionately in love and suffered spectacularly, to the point of the psych wards. She was always ready to bring to her new lover’s feet everything she owned, including the apartment her general had left her.

After breaking up with her latest lover, Martha committed suicide in an indecently literary manner: having gone to the hairdresser and the manicurist, she threw herself under a train. In Alisa, her mother’s insane behavior totally paralyzed any possibility of a futile and fruitless self-sacrifice.

Several former lovers came to Martha’s funeral, including the last one, who had abandoned her, thereby inflicting the deadly blow. They unloaded a mountain of flowers on the closed coffin, and the twenty-year-old Alisa, with her pale, not-quite-developed loveliness, despising and ashamed of her mother’s excessive sensuality, swore to herself that she would never become the plaything of such animals. And she didn’t. Hers was not a burdensome asceticism but one of rare, insignificant affairs that put her on a par with her peers in life experience.

She worked as an engineering draftsman, was pleased with her excellent performance, knew that no one in her office was able to draw a line better than she did. Toward the end of the twentieth century, computers appeared, and all the draftsmen, even the most distinguished ones, had to put away their pencils and suffer in order to master the program that gave precise commands: “Raise the pen, lower the pen, shift to the point. . . .” But at this point Alisa shifted to retirement.

The happiest part of her life lasted more than ten years: her pension was small, but Alisa found an excellent way of adding to it—three times a week, from ten until lunch, she walked with children in a garden. After that she was delightfully free. Occasionally she went to the theatre, more often to concerts at the Conservatory; she made interesting acquaintances there, and lived for her own good pleasure until one day, out of the blue, she fell unconscious next to the couch in her apartment. Having lain there for some time, she came to and was astonished by the strange angle of vision: the broken cup in a shallow puddle, the legs of the overturned chair, the nappy red-and-blue rug by her face. She got up easily. There was a pain in her elbow. She thought a bit and called the doctor. The doctor took her blood pressure and prescribed some pills. Everything seemed to be the same as before. With one exception: from that day on, Alisa began to think about death.

She did not have any relatives to speak of. The Polish and Lithuanian ones had long since vanished from the picture, having no love for the Soviet power represented by the late general. The general’s relatives, for their part, had no love for Martha or for her daughter, Alisa, for reasons no one remembered anymore. . . .

Alisa was sixty-four. She was in good health, except for the fainting fit that had unexpectedly reminded her of the finiteness of life. However, the question was: What if she got sick? Bedridden? Whom could she count on?

Alisa was unable to sleep. She spent several restless nights and then came up with a brilliant solution. It was very simple: once she was overcome by an unbearable illness, she could poison herself. Prepare a good poison beforehand, best of all some sleeping pills, so that she could take them and never wake up. Without stupidly showing off, as her mother had in her time. Anna Karenina, really! Simply take the pills—and not wake up. And in this way avoid, as it were, the unpleasantness of death. . . .

When this thought occurred to Alisa, she jumped out of bed and opened the drawer in which she knew there was a white porcelain box, for powder and other cosmetics, left by her mother. She could put the pills in the box, keep it by the bed, and, once the time came—take them.

Not yet, not tomorrow. But now was the time to think. First of all, she had to find a reliable doctor, who would give her a prescription for the pills in the necessary quantity. Not an easy task, but a feasible one. . . .

After the fainting fit, Alisa lived as usual, taking Arsiusha and Galochka for walks. They were sweet kids who lived in the same building as her; their mother, a well-bred woman, not some crude bitch, gave music lessons in the morning and in the afternoon took care of her children.

Alisa spent evenings at concerts and the theatre, as before, but she did not forget about a good doctor. One evening, she fell to talking with a fellow-theatregoer. They talked about this and that, and it turned out that the woman’s brother was a doctor. Incidentally a Jew. So there. Maybe there was something in what people said about them—saboteurs, poisoners. . . . In short, Alisa asked her new acquaintance to bring her together with her brother for a medical consultation.

A week later the brother, Alexander Yefimovich, came over. A sad, thin man with a questioning expression on his face. He thought he had been invited for a private medical visit, but Alisa seated him at the table, served tea. He was a bit perplexed, but the patient was well bred, with a very attractive appearance. Such a woman had never before entered his field of vision. Truth be told, it was long since any woman had entered his field of vision. His female patients he considered strictly from a medical point of view. For three years, he had been a widower, languished in solitude, and refused to listen to the hints of his relatives about the harmfulness of being alone.

The table was laid elegantly, fine china cups were set on a gray linen tablecloth, the candy was imported, small, not like hefty Russian Bears in the Pine Forest. Alisa Fedorovna herself was, like her cups and her candy, graceful, with thin, unsmiling lips, her pale-blond hair smoothly pulled back. She poured him tea and told him her problem directly: “I need strong sleeping pills, in such quantity that if I take them I will not wake up.”

Alexander Yefimovich thought a little, took a sip of tea, and asked, “Do you suffer from an oncological condition?”

“No, I’m in perfect health. The thing is that I would like to be healthy when I pass away. At the moment when I decide to do it. I have no relatives who could take care of me, and I don’t have the slightest wish to linger in hospitals, suffering and urinating in my bed. I need sleeping pills so that I can take them once my decision is made. I simply want to buy myself an easy death. Do you see anything bad in that?”

“How old are you?” The doctor, after a long pause, asked a perfectly medical question.

“Sixty-four.”

“You look wonderfully well. No one would guess you were more than fifty,” he observed.

“I know. But I didn’t invite you to pay me compliments. Tell me definitively whether you could prescribe me the necessary medicine in a sufficient dose. . . .”

The doctor took his glasses off, set them down in front of him, and rubbed his eyes.

“I need to think. You see, in principle, barbiturates are prescribed in a special way. . . . It’s a matter of legality.”

“But in this case it’s very well paid,” Alisa Fedorovna said dryly.

“I’m a doctor, and for me it’s a moral question first of all. I confess, it’s the first time in my life that I’ve met with such a request.”

They finished the tea. They parted, with the doctor promising to think and to call and tell her what he decided.

Now it was Alexander Yefimovich who could not sleep. She would not leave his head, this thin, pallid woman, so unlike any he had met in his life. Most unlike his wife, Raya, who had been cheerful, with constantly straying, crumpled strands of hair, with cardigans always threadbare over her big breasts, noisy, even loud . . . and how painfully Raya had departed, eaten up by sarcoma, with bouts of monstrous suffering unrelieved by morphine.

For a whole week he was unable to come to a decision, thinking every day about calling this astonishing Alisa and being unable to solve the little moral problem she had posed for him. A direct, honest, most worthy woman! It would have been easy for her to complain of insomnia, ask for some sleeping pills, which he would have prescribed, save up ten or twenty doses—who would check?—take them, and fall asleep forever.

An unplanned meeting occurred at the Conservatory, at Pletnev’s concert, in the intermission after the suite from Tchaikovsky’s “Sleeping Beauty” and before a Chopin sonata. Alisa did not recognize him at first, but he recognized her—instantly. She stood at the bar with a glass of water, looking around for a free chair. Alexander Yefimovich bowed to her from a distance. Rose, nodded in invitation, and she sat down in his vacated chair. . . .

After the concert, he accompanied her home. While they had been listening to music, it had been pouring rain. Puddles spread across the whole street, and the bronze Tchaikovsky in his bronze chair sat in a small pool of rainwater. The doctor took Alisa Fedorovna’s arm. Her arm was light and firm—as Raya’s had been when he first accompanied her after their high-school graduation party. He walked along, marvelling at this long-forgotten tactile sensation.

Here’s a man who doesn’t want anything from me, Alisa thought. It’s I who expect a favor from him.

They talked about Pletnev, he mentioned Yudina, observing that since her death it had been Pletnev who best represented the type of musician who takes upon himself the right to offer a new personal interpretation of the classics. Alisa Fedorovna realized that she was talking to a man who felt music deeply, like a professional, not a superficial listener like herself.

He took her right to her house, finding without any difficulty in the depth of the unlit courtyard the two-story annex he had visited a week earlier. He had an excellent sense of orientation, both in the forest and in the city: he easily found a place he had seen once. They stopped at the entrance.

They were already saying goodbye, but she could not bring herself to repeat the question for which she had invited him a week ago.

There was an awkward pause, which he broke with the questioning expression that was peculiar to him.

“Alisa Fedorovna, I’m ready to accede to your request, but I would like to come to this question later, when”—he was clearly struggling to find the right words—“when the circumstances are ripe. Till then I take upon myself the care of your health.”

She nodded. No one had ever taken upon himself the care of her, and she would not have allowed it! But it felt good to hear it. She offered him her light, firm hand and took hold of the door handle. The entryway was dark.

“Allow me. . . .” He followed her into the damp darkness.

In the darkness she felt for the first step and tripped slightly. He caught her from behind.

This was how their love affair started—the falling back into youth from a chance touch, the first kiss in the entryway, the burn of the unexpectedness, the feeling of complete trust in the man in Alisa’s soul.

And Alisa entrusted more to him than women entrust when young—not her life, but her death.

The happiest year in Alisa’s life began. Alexander Yefimovich did not disturb the soft cocoon of solitude that Alisa had woven and in which she felt protected. In an astonishing way he even strengthened this protection. As if he provided her with a cover from above. What particularly amazed Alisa was Alexander Yefimovich’s ability to guess her whimsical taste. Without asking a single question about what she preferred, he brought her firm green apples and pink marshmallows, her favorite striped caramel, lilacs not white but purple, and the special Kostromskoy cheese. Everything she liked.

Alisa was always sensitive to smells, and all the men with whom she had once had relations had smelled of metal, or tobacco, or some animal, but this lover of her old age smelled of the mild baby soap with which he washed his hands before and after examining each patient. The very soap that Alisa had always preferred to all those other artificial scents . . .

Alexander Yefimovich, who had lived all his life next to a powerful and demanding woman with extensive needs, tireless in having various, mutually exclusive desires, discovered for the first time that it was possible, next to a woman, to be free from inexhaustible female power. Reserved Alisa, timid even in moments of intimacy, radiated silent gratitude. At the end of his seventh decade he felt himself not a lifelong hired serviceman but a generous giver of joy. In moments of tenderness they called each other by the same teen-age nickname, Alik.

Alexander Yefimovich had worked for many years as a neurologist in the clinic of the Russian Theatre Society, and, owing to his patients, had vast connections. He took Alisa on weekdays to the best performances of the season at the Conservatory, and on Saturdays came to her place for an intimate supper. For the first time in her life, Alisa cooked not for herself alone. . . .

Life changed, age retreated, and only one thing was troubling: somewhere far off hovered the nagging thought that this unplanned happiness could not last.

Alisa knew that after his wife’s death he had lived with his younger, unmarried daughter, Marina, who was not quite healthy and not quite happy. The older, Anya, healthy and happy, had long lived with her husband and their two school-age children.

During the whole winter the couple met like enamored teen-agers, and in the summer they went on vacation together, disrupting the plans of the younger daughter, who was used to spending summer vacations with her parents. But Alexander Yefimovich did not inform Alisa of this upsetting conflict with his daughter. He bought two vouchers to Komarovo, and in the middle of the summer, when the white nights dimmed and the cool Petersburg heat was not tiring, they arrived at the House of Creativity.

They stayed in separate rooms at opposite ends of the corridor and were amused by their mutual evening visits.

“You and I, Alik, are like schoolchildren hiding from parental eyes,” Alexander Yefimovich said, laughing, when Alisa opened the door for him after a faint rhythmic knocking.

Alisa only smiled mysteriously in response: her first, sluggish love affair had occurred five years after her mother’s death, when her classmates and peers had already managed to acquire husbands, children, and lovers, to get divorced and marry again, and so she had no idea of precisely how teen-agers conceal their love affairs from their parents. Her mother, Martha, never thought of concealing her affairs from Alisa; they were all well displayed, and Alisa had suffered from their noisy passions.

All that Alisa had lacked in her youth was showered on her in her old age, and she was slightly embarrassed by her status as a mistress, especially in the mornings, when they went down to the hotel’s restaurant, filled almost uniformly with elderly couples long weary of their marriages. After breakfast they went on lengthy promenades, occasionally missing lunch and returning only toward evening. This was their first time in the formerly Finnish land; they knew little about its history and geography, and they wandered at random, now crossing the dunes and emerging onto a sandy beach with occasional boulders forgotten on the shore in the ice age, and now straying to Pike Lake, where bathing was much more pleasant than in the Finnish Bay, overgrown with some brownish slime.

At the lake they met one of Alexander Yefimovich’s acquaintances, an actor and a former patient who had lived in Leningrad and was an old-timer in these parts. He sat with his sleepy fishing rod in the fruitless hope of catching, if not a pike, then at least a small perch, and was glad to see the doctor. On learning that the doctor and Alisa were here for the first time, he volunteered to show them the former Kellomäki. He took them around the village, showing them the old Finnish dachas, those that had not been dismantled and taken to Finland when this land became Russian, took them to Shostakovich’s dacha, to Akhmatova’s cabin, restored and painted a cheerful green, to the dachas of the very little-known academician Komarov and the very well-known academician Pavlov. . . . For three days they walked around with this volunteer guide, then broke away from him and wandered in a sparse forest gathering blueberries and sour raspberries. . . .

The twenty-four days of the voucher went on endlessly, and in the course of those long days and short nights they became as close as if behind them were many years of living together.

When they returned to Moscow, Alexander Yefimovich proposed. Alisa was silent for a long time and then reminded him of her request, with which he had never complied. He had managed to forget what it was about. The sleeping pills . . .

“Alisa, Alisinka, why? Why on earth now?”

“Especially now,” Alisa said, smiling.

“I don’t understand. . . .”

“Because this is going to end . . . and I want to be prepared.”

He already knew that it was useless to argue with Alisa.

“This is madness. But I accept.”

Alisa took the little porcelain box out of the drawer and handed it to Alexander Yefimovich. “Put them in here.”

This was some shift of consciousness, but there was nothing he could do about it.

“All right, all right. But first we’ll get married. And then I’ll put them in here—as a wedding present.”

He laughed, but he received no smile in response.

“This marriage—isn’t it ridiculous? And what will your daughters say?”

“That doesn’t matter in the least,” he said, and fell to thinking. For the younger, the unsettled one, with her unstable psychology, it could be a real blow. . . .

In the fall, soon after the first anniversary of their acquaintance, Alexander Yefimovich turned seventy. He organized a modest tea party at work, received as a gift from his colleagues a new leather briefcase, which differed from the old one only in the number on the silver badge—“70” instead of “60.”

For friends and family he organized a dinner at the Anchor restaurant. Alisa did not want to come. He insisted—this would be the best occasion to meet his daughters. Alexander kept advancing, Alisa kept retreating. He had already introduced her to his close friends, his schoolmates Kostya and Aliona and his fellow-students the psychiatrist Tobolsky and the obstetrician Pritsker. His family was the last hurdle.

After some hesitation, he invited his cousin, who had introduced them, and Musya Turman, his late wife’s closest friend. This was a risky gesture, but strategically faultless. He was conducting his preparations on a broad front.

Alisa still hung back. She fussed till the last moment, now consenting to go to this reception, then refusing. She had long grown accustomed to being a queen: it was of no importance to her whether she was liked by those around her or not—queens do not feel this dependence on other people’s opinions. But here she became anxious and immediately felt annoyed with herself.

Alexander Yefimovich finally managed to persuade her, an hour before leaving home: “You mean too much to me, I can no longer conceal you. Besides, I have to prepare them all. . . .”

And she surrendered.

They came almost simultaneously; by ten past seven the guests were all sitting at the table.

“I would like you to meet Alisa Fedorovna,” Alexander Yefimovich proudly announced, and introduced each guest in turn to Alisa: Anya with her husband and the two grandchildren, Marina, Musya Turman.

Alisa was impeccable, and she knew it. Her tobacco-colored silk top was cinched at the slender waist with a soft leather belt, and hers was the only waist among the barrel-like figures of the ladies. The guests were somewhat stunned, even the daughters, who had been warned that their father had invited his lady friend. Musya Turman sat there speechless—she glanced at this person with the late Raya’s eyes and felt insulted.

“Nothing to look at,” she whispered to Anya. But Anya did not second her.

“Why, Aunt Musya, she’s a very interesting woman. And her figure . . .”

“Figure, figure!” Musya snorted. “She’s a manipulator. She’ll show herself, just mark my words!”

But the waiter was already pouring champagne, and Alexander’s friend Kostya raised his glass.

Kostya, gray-haired, jowly, rotund, began to speak. Sashka and he had known each other for sixty-seven years out of seventy, knew each other so well that sometimes they couldn’t tell where the boundary between their thoughts was, he no longer knew who first said, who first thought, they were more than friends and more than brothers, and all his life he, Kostya, had followed after and never caught up with him. . . . And there were more words, all of them praiseful and somehow merry. And in the end he said that he was glad to see next to Sashka the magical Alisa, who came to us from Wonderland. Alisa produced a cool smile. . . .

A month later they quietly and casually registered their marriage. Alexander Yefimovich fulfilled his promise: the little porcelain box, filled with little white pills, now sat on the desk next to a stack of writing paper, envelopes, and outdated subway tickets.

With astonishing delicacy Alexander Yefimovich introduced himself into Alisa’s apartment, not disrupting anything in it but, on the contrary, solidly repairing everything that hung on a string or had been held together with tape. He fixed the loose branch of a chandelier and replaced the burner that had long been out of order, and Alisa had an ever-strengthening feeling that his medical abilities extended to curing everything he touched. Without extraneous help, the plant on the windowsill began to bloom—something it had never done before.

The spouses, who had had no complaints about their health even before, grew visibly younger.

“The hormonal cycles have started over,” the husband laughed.

Toward spring, another unforeseen and improbable event came to light: Alexander Yefimovich’s younger daughter, Marina, who was almost forty, became pregnant. A birth defect—a cleft lip and palate, and then small scars left on her face by a quite successful surgery—had distorted her character more than her appearance. Since childhood, she had avoided all company, choosing the career of a proofreader, which allowed her to keep company only with texts. Her father was amazed by the fact of her pregnancy. He was also rather glad, understanding that he would leave his daughter not alone but with a child, who could replace for her the whole world, which she regarded as hostile.

Alisa nodded vaguely when he told her: she had her own thoughts concerning childbearing, but she felt no need to share them with her husband. The less so as her thoughts had long since lost all topical interest.

When Alexander Yefimovich shared the news with Alisa, the pregnancy had been concealed in the fat stomach for six months already, but was imperceptible even to an attentive eye. Marina was the same fat, flabby woman she had been since her youth.

When the time of the delivery drew near, the father arranged for his daughter, old for a first birth, to enter a good maternity hospital on Shabolovka Street, where his former fellow-student Pritsker was the head of the department. Considering Marina’s age and weight, it was decided to perform a Cesarean section. The surgery was scheduled for a Tuesday morning. Alexander Yefimovich waited for the call from the surgeon and was informed that all was well—the baby girl was without defects, or at least without a cleft lip. Alexander Yefimovich still remembered the horror he had experienced when his wife came out of the hospital with a little girl with a yawning triangular hole from mouth to nose. Now he sighed with relief.

“So I’ll go to the hospital,” he said to Alisa.

They put together a package of food for the new mother: kefir, milk, candies, and a piece of cheese. He left the house and had a stroke of luck: he saw that some beautiful, fresh hyacinths—Alisa’s favorite—had just been delivered to the nearby florist, and he bought a big bouquet for his daughter and for the nurses. The salesgirl wrapped the bouquet in gift paper. He went out into the deserted street in the calm after lunchtime with the flowers and the plastic bag of food. There was a thinnish crowd waiting for the bus. He stood a little apart to protect the beautiful hyacinths from the jostling people when the bus arrived.

Just then, a big black car, driving at high speed in the middle of the street, collided with another car as big and black, and was forced onto the sidewalk. It ran into a lamppost, knocking down three people on its way. One, with a bouquet of flowers, was killed. . . .

In the evening, Alisa called Pritsker. He said that everything was fine with Marina and the baby, but that Alexander had not come. Alisa began to make more phone calls. Fifteen minutes later, she was told that her husband was in the morgue. They had spent the whole day trying to find the family, but at his home address no one answered the phone.

That was the end. “Yes, yes, I’ve been expecting something like that.” The porcelain box in the drawer . . .

Alisa began the next morning with the hospital—took the milk, kefir, and cheese to Marina. Then she went to the morgue. The funeral was delayed by the forensic examination.

Marina was told about her father’s death only three days later. She had a breakdown, and Alexander Yefimovich’s friend Professor Tobolsky took her to the Kashchenko Institute. For the time being the baby girl stayed in the hospital. . . . Anya, Marina’s older sister, was unable to take the baby—her husband, who could not stand Marina, rebelled.

Two weeks later, the baby was taken from the hospital by her grandmother, Alisa Fedorovna. Alisa had had a premonition that her happiness with Alexander Yefimovich would not last, but the premonition had told her nothing about the newborn baby.

The girl lived in a pram next to Alisa’s bed. Alisa did not want to move to her husband’s apartment, even though it was bigger. There everything was dirty, and the bathtub, with its cracked enamel, was awful, and here there was a new one, shiningly white.

Marina was discharged from the psychiatric hospital after six months. But how could little Alexandra be entrusted to this flabby, slovenly, psychologically troubled woman?

The box with the barbiturates was still in the drawer, but Alisa could no longer make use of her husband’s wedding present. That is, theoretically she could. Sometime . . . when the circumstances were ripe . . . ♦

(Translated, from the Russian, by Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky.)