Title: All Rivers
Author: Amos Oz

Tova, a simple name, a popular name, not quite suited to a young poetess. The same could be said of her body: too big. Admittedly, only slightly too big. A girl with a mother’s body. On her hips and her shoulders an emphatic surplus layer, not without tenderness. The flesh of her arms too full. She wasn’t an ethereal girl.

I don’t remember the color of her eyes. The strange thing is that the color of her trousers I remember very well; they were made of some coarse fabric, a little tattered, with a color somewhere between dark blue and dark gray. I don’t know what to call this color; maybe it doesn’t have a name. But I can see it even now, without the slightest effort. I see it tangibly, and not only that—my fingers can feel the roughness of the fabric, a warm and fluid roughness, although I never touched it.

Her hair was brown, dark, a little dry. Eyes of a color that I’m simply incapable of remembering, although I haven’t forgotten the weariness in them. Tiny wrinkles curling at the corners, and something not far from scorn lurking there and beside her lips. To be orderly, after describing her eyes I should describe her nose: a little heavy, unlike her mouth, which betrayed solitude and kindness. Her lips were never at rest. Even when she was silent, her lips were twitching.

Her chin belied the softness of her lips: this was a sharp, haughty chin, abruptly interrupting the flow of her jawline, and, below it, a rather short neck. That’s not right. Tova’s neck was neither short nor thick. Its only flaw was that it wasn’t long and stalk-like. A laughable flaw.

You see, this is what often happens to me. I’ve tried to describe Tova’s face systematically, following a certain order, and even a casual glance will reveal that, in my haste to move from her hair to her eyes, I missed her forehead. I missed her cheeks, too. Enough said. The story is letting me down, stretching things out one after another, but when you look at Tova you see her face and the rest of her all at once. Also, a face is alive and words are dead. I’m tired of words. You strive to be accurate, and then words come along and falsify everything.

My name is Eliezer Dror. I am twenty-eight years old, and a native of kibbutz Tel Tomer. My parents were among the founding members of the kibbutz, and they participated in the laying of the foundation stone and the plowing of the first furrow, in my mother’s words. My mother is responsible for cultural activities: parties, celebrations, carnival masks, decorations, fancy dress, lectures, study days. There’s no end to her angry energy. Tova is a slow and disorganized girl. She’s thirty-three—in other words, five years older than me. I didn’t ask her her age; she told me voluntarily. Here we go again: I’m telling things out of order. My father is a midget of a man, shorter than my mother, and much quieter. He’s worked all these years in the cattle pen; he has clear and crystallized political views, and no complaints, except about the most general issues—the heat of summer, the cold of winter.

I was discharged from the Army with the rank of lieutenant, and now I’m a reservist in the paras. Blond-haired. A little of what I did in wartime I’ll mention later on, when I write about the things that I told Tova in the café. (You see, I’m getting mixed up again: What I did in the Army came before what I told Tova, obviously. And what I told Tova now also belongs to the past, and just now I promised to tell in the future what I’ve already told in the past. Strange, how it’s almost impossible to write or say anything without distortion or, to put it plainly, without telling lies.)

My work on the kibbutz is a real success story. We have a small workshop, which we like to call a factory, where we produce decorative shades for lamps. I’m the manager of the factory; I was given the job because I’m considered to be an energetic and industrious guy, with initiative and imagination. At least, that’s what they said about me in the meeting at which I was appointed. Maybe they also took into account my Army service, in the Sinai campaign of ’56 and in three reprisal raids. I’ll return to this detail.

Girls. Sometimes they come to my room in a group, bringing cakes with them, and I pour the drinks. It was I who introduced to Tel Tomer the custom of drinking a glass of liquor on winter nights. This caused a lot of gossip, but earned me some praise as well. I tell these girls about life in the Army. It sometimes happens that one of them stays behind after the others have gone, and sometimes in the morning I receive a nice compliment. All these dalliances are short and superficial because, actually, there’s no burning passion in me. And if one of them starts blubbering, that’s always and invariably the beginning of the end; tears I can’t stand. Everything can be explained quietly, and you should try to persuade with logic. If you can’t raise sensible arguments, then what use is weeping?

Every evening before the girls arrive to drink and talk, I devote an hour or an hour and a half to my stamp collection. It’s one of the best collections in the country. My father started it in Lodz fifty-two years ago. I inherited it when I came back from the Army, and in less than six years I’ve succeeded in doubling it in size. I should say a little more about my collection, because it was the collection that led to my meeting Tova. Indirectly, that is. I didn’t find her name on a list of collectors, and we didn’t exchange stamps and eventually meet out of curiosity, following a prolonged correspondence. Life isn’t that simple. I don’t like talking about “blind chance,” especially after what I went through in the war, but the subject of the meeting with Tova is complicated. I’ve decided to tell the story in meticulous order, and that’s the way I shall carry on telling it.

Philately is a delight that someone who hasn’t experienced it could never understand. I go back to my room after supper, sit in my armchair, and light a cigarette, smoking slowly and with concentration, inhaling short puffs. (This is one of the three cigarettes I smoke every day: at lunchtime, in the evening, and one more before bedtime.) After the cigarette, I find some concert on the radio, something soft and soothing as a background. I close the shutters and switch on the table lamp (the lamp and the shade both my own work). And then I start sorting according to the catalogue, checking, examining, recording, and sticking in place. I also write letters, one every evening. I am in contact with more than twenty collectors in all parts of the world, and I make regular exchanges with them. There is Pedro Antonio Y Madre Gonzales, in Lima, Peru; there is a Polish priest named Jan, who writes to me in Biblical Hebrew and is eager to know how the construction of the country is progressing and whether certain signs that he believes will presage the arrival of the Messiah have been seen in the hills of Jerusalem; and Tokama, from Nagasaki, a pacifist and militant socialist who is always full of praise for the ideals of the kibbutz. Alexander, a Jewish boy from the city of Kishinev, sends me the stamps of Baltic republics that ceased to exist years ago, and asks me to send him more and more stamps from Israel, “because the girls make ornaments out of Israeli stamps.” Nicos the Greek, from Marseilles, sends me Arabian stamps, old and new, which are very difficult to obtain in this country. Then there is Fuad, of Lebanese origin and living in Monrovia, Liberia. His first letter bore my name and the name of my kibbutz, in the Hashemite Kingdom of Israel. Perhaps he meant it as a joke. I wrote to him and told him politely what I thought of jokes like this, and since then his letters have been short and correct and the stamps that he sends me are very good. Not to mention Joachim, from Linz, who sends me stamps and refuses to accept anything in return; he sees the stamps that he sends me as a kind of “symbolic compensation for an unpardonable sin.” Why have I mentioned all these philatelists? To explain the process of stamp collecting? Or perhaps because I’m trying to buy time before getting to the story of Tova?

After writing a letter, I leaf through my albums slowly, a little at a time, as if I were sipping good wine. Here stamps are arranged according to their origin, date, quality, color, and provenance. No damaged stamp will ever be admitted; they are all subjected to ruthless inspection under my magnifying glass. Even a rare or decorative stamp is excluded from the collection if it shows the slightest blemish or if the perforation isn’t intact. Incidentally, the rarest and most valuable stamps are never the most remarkable in appearance or style. All the colorful displays, the silver and gold, triangular and oval shapes—those are just kid stuff.

Incidentally, when I told Tova about the stamp collection—this was on our way to the seafront—she understood at once the joy in order that’s a fundamental part of collecting, and even came out with a poetic statement: “God collects us, too, one by one, arranges us, sticks us in his album, and enjoys the harmony that hides behind our suffering.” So she said, more or less. I’m getting my chronology mixed up again.

One evening, I read in the monthly Stamp World a small and very important announcement. A Tel Aviv collector, a certain Dr. Eliezer M. Berlin, was looking for a rare Austrian stamp, an Austro-Hungarian stamp, in fact, from the year 1899. In exchange for this stamp, Dr. Berlin was offering a full set of stamps of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Anyone interested was asked to contact him by phone or visit him at his home in Tel Aviv, on such-and-such street, at the corner of some other street, at 1 P.M. (precisely!).

On reading this advertisement I leaped up from my chair, because the stamp he wanted was one of my duplicates (among the stamps that my father had collected in Warsaw, before the cataclysm). To anyone who knows anything about philately, the words “stamps of Bosnia and Herzegovina” need no further explanation. I decided to take time off work the very next day and hotfoot it to Tel Aviv, to get ahead of any competitors. At six in the morning, I set out, and shortly before seven I arrived at the central bus station in Haifa, and by eight-thirty I was in Tel Aviv, raring to go, with the precious Austro-Hungarian stamp in my pocket.

I’ve already despaired of trying to paint a picture with words, because words have to come one after another, and it’s in the nature of a picture to appear before the eyes all at once. But I’ll try to describe the rare stamp for which Dr. Berlin was prepared to pay so generously: it shows a woman bathing in a river. On the riverbank, there are deer.

The whole morning was ahead of me. I went for a stroll and stopped by a few of the shops that sold my factory’s products. I visited a few stamp dealers in Herzl Street and Allenby Street, inspected a lot, and bought very little. What did they have to offer me?

Then I looked at my watch and saw that I still had time before one o’clock. I bought a paper and went into a restaurant—the Tnuva, to be precise. I ordered two fresh rolls, a green salad, an omelette, yogurt, and coffee. While waiting to be served, I killed a fly with one deft blow and opened up the paper.

The waitress, a small woman, painted and ugly, asked me how I wanted my coffee. At that moment, I saw another fly, and this one, too, I squashed on the table with a brisk hand movement. I asked for coffee with milk. Suddenly, a woman stood up at one of the other tables and scolded the waitress, complaining that “even here you can’t sit in peace.” I realized that the rebuke was meant for me, and I told the woman that as much as the noise was disturbing her the flies were disturbing me. Tova shrank back into her corner and didn’t say a word. I drank and ate and read the paper.

The restaurant was almost empty: Tova, me, and the waitress. The waitress smoked a cigarette, and opened the Hungarian paper Új Kelet. Tova smoked and wrote something on a sheet of paper torn from a pad. I wondered if it would be worth it to smoke my lunchtime cigarette now, out of boredom. But I looked at my watch and decided against it.

Suddenly the waitress said, “It’s starting to warm up outside.”

I was quick to agree with her, because what she’d said was quite true. I said, “Yes. Warming up.”

And, after a prolonged silence, Tova said from her corner, “Well, we can stand the heat, but this humidity will be the death of us all.”

I was fed up with the paper. I pushed the empty ashtray away, and I thought, Maybe I’ll pay and go. The question was, Where could I go now? The waitress had gone to the kitchen and was cursing somebody there. I could hear but I couldn’t see whom she was cursing. Meanwhile, I looked at Tova. I was relaxed and completely lucid. Even now, putting these things down on paper, I am lucid and relaxed. At the start of my Army service, they used to say of me, “That Eliezer, he won’t lose his head in a hurry.” I saw smoke rings and the quiver at the corners of her lips. I saw how the flies were gathering around her coffee cup, and she either didn’t notice or didn’t care. But now, when I remember all these details, it seems to me that there was another detail, perhaps a central detail, that escaped me.

I said, “Are you waiting for someone?”

She started to answer me and suddenly began coughing. At first it was a light cough, as if she were clearing her throat. Then she started choking and wheezing, and the distorted and ugly sounds emerging from her lungs almost resembled the barking of a dog. She stood up unsteadily, and immediately had to clutch at the table for support, her mouth gaping like the mouth of a thirsty fish.

I didn’t hesitate. I approached her and slapped her back. She recoiled and tried to say something. Her lips trembled. But, when her coughing subsided and she managed to say what she had wanted to say, the words came too late: “Don’t touch me.”

I begged her pardon and offered to go and get her a glass of water. I had no ulterior motive; I just wanted to help her.

“I don’t need help,” she said.

I smiled. “I never yet met a girl who didn’t need help.”

“I’m not a girl,” Tova said, taking a glass of water from the Hungarian waitress. “I’m a woman of thirty-three.”

When she made this strange remark, there was a kind of smile on her lips—and only on her lips: the rest of her face seemed reluctant to participate. Something not far from contempt was implied in the corners of her eyes. I decided to exchange fact for fact.

“And I’m twenty-eight years old. My name is Eliezer. Free agent.”

These words seemed to appeal to her. This time her eyes smiled, too, through the veil of tears brought on by the coughing fit. She hurriedly turned over the sheet of paper on her table so that I couldn’t see what was written on it, and said, “Sit down, if you like.”

But I’d had a quick glimpse of the page, on which there was a series of short lines. I sat down at her table and said, “A blessed place this is, bringing together a poet and a poetess. May I read it?”

She wavered for a moment, a shadow of suspicion passing across her eyes. Finally, she came to a decision and lit a new cigarette. “What do you want from me, anyway?”

“Nothing in particular.” The question surprised me. “Just to get acquainted. I’m Eliezer Dror, from kibbutz Tel Tomer. And I write poems, too, sometimes, especially for kibbutz festivals. Humorous poems, but usually they come to a serious conclusion.”

Tova said, “Most kibbutzniks have no manners. You seem to be all right. I saw how you jumped up to help me when I was coughing. My name is Tova, and I smoke too much. So thank you very much, you can go now, you’re liberated. A free agent, like you said. I’m O.K. now.”

“Just a moment,” I said. Now I was really annoyed with her, and I had no intention of passing over in silence the two insults, neither of which I deserved. “One moment before you expel me from your table. First, you’re far from O.K., and, second, what is that supposed to mean—‘kibbutzniks have no manners’? I could make generalizations, too—for example, that poets are disturbed creatures.”

“That’s true. Especially when people are disturbing them. Perhaps you could let me know, finally, what it is that you want from me?”

She panted. She pulled the ashtray toward her, picked up the cigarette that she’d stubbed out during the coughing fit, and relit it. She lit the cigarette with knitted brows, with strong and supple fingers. At this moment, I noticed something else for the first time: the thumb of her left hand was missing, and this aroused in me a brief but intense thrill. I said, “If I’m disturbing the muses, I’d better go straightaway. I only wanted to tell you that I really do love poetry. Now I’ll ask you to excuse me. Goodbye.”

“No, wait,” Tova said. “If you’re not in a hurry, sit with me for a while.”

“I’m not in a hurry,” I said. And, right then, I decided to smoke my lunchtime cigarette.

“I’ve offended you,” she said.

I denied this. I told her that I’m the kind of person who gives offense but is never offended, one of the proverbial thirty-six sinners. She smiled at me, with suspicion or perhaps just extreme fatigue. I couldn’t resist glancing under the table for another look at the hand with the missing thumb. Tova caught this look, and she told me that the poem in front of her was, in fact, finished and just needed some final polishing. Did I really love poetry?

I assured her that I did. I told her that I had once written a non-humorous poem. This was during my Army service, after a distressing incident.

She said that she didn’t like the lofty rhymes of kibbutz poets. All the same, if I were to recite the poem I’d written she was prepared to listen. In the meantime, we could drink another coffee.

“This was a poem about my friend,” I said. “A lad from Netanya who joined the Army at the same time as me. He was killed just half a metre away from me—I’m here and he’s there—in a raid on Khirbet Zatar. His parents decided to publish a book of remembrance. Or perhaps it was just a pamphlet. They asked me to contribute something, and I came up with the poem.”

I recited it from memory. The first verse describes a young cypress growing in the sand. In the second verse, a fire breaks out among the trees. In the third, the cypress is burned, and the pine sheds its foliage, because it can’t forget the cypress that grew beside it, and it can’t understand why it survived and the cypress didn’t. “Maybe not a work of genius, but written with a passionate heart. That’s it. Now it’s your turn. Show me what you’ve written.”

“Wait a moment,” Tova said, and I knew that I was going to need to exert more pressure before she’d let me read the poem, which she so much wanted to show me. “Wait a moment, tell me first about the Army. About that raid on the village you mentioned.”

“Khirbet Zatar,” I said, “is a cursed village,” and I fell silent. I couldn’t talk about this raid without mentioning my own little act of heroism, for which I got a commendation, and I don’t like boasting.

Tova didn’t press me. Maybe she thought that my memories of the raid were too painful and it was hard for me to recount them. She tossed her head back and let her hair cascade, and her lips quivered. So I gave in and told her how I had volunteered to crawl in the dark, a sidelong approach to the machine-gun post that was decimating us, and what I’d felt as I crawled, unobserved, to a distance of less than forty metres from the emplacement, and how I’d wiped out the machine gunners with one expert throw of a hand grenade. All this in the dark. And how everyone said to me afterward, “Eliezer, there’s nothing to say.”

Tova tried to tell me something—perhaps she wanted to express her feelings—but the coughing assailed her again. She started to shudder and groan, her saliva dripping onto the table. And again the hideous sounds resembled the barking of a dog. I slapped her back until she recovered a little and managed to say, “I’ve already asked you not to touch me.” I signalled to the waitress, and she hurried away to get another glass of water. And the fascination began to rage in me, arising perhaps from Tova’s truncated thumb and perhaps from her morbid coughing. Wasn’t it madness, when the whole body was gripped by spasms, to carry on smoking? With dedication, with concentration. As if she were trying to punish herself, as if she enjoyed suffering. And why did these things tempt me to the point where I had to make an almighty effort not to do something that I’d regret? Madness.

Memory distorts everything.

Really, it was nothing. She with her coughing, I with my nausea and fascination. All the other details have attached themselves to my memory and they give me no peace, though it makes no difference if they were there or if they weren’t: the sounds of the city, the smell of the sea on the wind, the smell of sweat. A thin and unshaved man who came in to buy cigarettes and, as he was going out, told us with a silly grin that we should hurry, hurry, time was passing and it wouldn’t come back. And a little girl who came in and tugged at the Hungarian waitress’s sleeve and kept telling her, “You’ve got to come quickly. Helena says she’s going away once and for all.” And the flies that I’d killed, still dead and redundant, on the tablecloth.

All these details add nothing and subtract nothing. The story needs to move forward, but memory doesn’t move forward; it moves backward, from the end to the beginning, like a crab, like someone waking up from a nightmare and trying to remember what it was, and going back from the nightmare to the unimportant details that preceded it, to try to reconstruct how the dream began, and how it reached the point where fear woke him up.

Living flies came to sniff the bodies of their brothers on the tablecloth. And the big old clock on the shelf, which at 10:30 in the morning said it was 10:30, and at 11:00 and 11:20 continued to insist that it was 10:30.

Again I urged Tova to let me see the poem she’d written. I tried humor: which muse, I wanted to know, which muse had I driven away when I approached her? Tova said that her poems were written without recourse to any muses. Without inspiration, even. On the contrary. She wrote in a mood as cold as ice. Like a chemist in a lab, handling toxic materials: careful, lucid, and with full concentration. A poem was the embodiment of fundamental combinations. Like a solution, like crystals of venom.

She talked and I came to a decision: abruptly, I pulled the sheet of paper out from under her hand, turned it over, and began to read.

She stopped in midsentence. Perhaps she turned pale. I read the poem once and, when I started reading it for the second time, there was already a new cigarette in her hand, and she smoked and shuddered, as if suddenly everything depended on me, on what I would say or do, and then I noticed that she was trying to follow the progress of my eyes along the lines of the poem; because we were sitting face to face, she was forced to read the poem upside down, like an immigrant child learning the Torah. Then she laid the palm of her hand on the back of my hand and said, “Don’t say anything. Don’t say anything yet. Wait. Perhaps you don’t want to say anything. Don’t feel obliged. You don’t have to say anything.”

Her hand on mine. And the poem:

All rivers flow to the sea
And the sea is not filled.
All poems poison the blood
And the blood is destruction distilled.
All that is here goes there,
And there is only the moribund sea.
Wise men are asleep in their homes.
Only the river is in purgatory.
All rivers flow to the sea,
And the sea turns barren and does not sleep and is not extinguished and is not.

“If you really want to say something, then say it. Now.”

I said, “The last line spoils the whole poem for you.”

Tova said suddenly, “You’re not married yet. And you won’t be getting married anytime soon.”

I didn’t see the connection between this comment and what I had said. I decided not to let it go. “If you were to polish, or just shorten, the last line, the poem would make a lot more sense. And maybe you could find a rhyme for the last line. Perhaps this is the way it came out for you, not quite stitched together at the end, because I disturbed you when you were working on it.”

“You’re cute. If it were winter now, I could even fall in love with you. If you’re a free agent, as you said before, would you like to join me for a walk to the sea?”

I said, “Let’s go.”

I think at this point I should explain, or, at any rate, try to explain. I’m a tall and broad-shouldered young man, and what I’d told Tova about Khirbet Zatar, about the machine-gun post and the commendation, had definitely fascinated her.

I was firm and uncompromising about the bill. I paid the waitress for our coffees and said, “Nothing to argue about. It’s nothing. Forget it.”

Tova said, “You really are one of the thirty-six sinners. Don’t touch me—it’s starting again.” And she burst into a fusillade of coughing. I noticed that her hanky was crumpled and not very clean. Strange, even this detail aroused my desire.

She coughed as if she were trying to spew her lungs out. Her face contorted. Her eyes began to water, and soon tears and saliva were mingling together. She tried to wipe her face, but her movements were clumsy. I considered taking out my own hanky to wipe her face, but then I remembered her explicit request not to be touched. I saw how her damaged hand was searching for something in the air and not finding it, but not giving up, probing. Wild, frantic, the excitement made me tremble. I restrained myself. Tova was standing now in front of the shiny espresso machine, using it as a mirror and trying to repair her face, her hair, and her eyes.

I said, as I used to say to unfit soldiers on long route marches, “Don’t worry. It isn’t that bad.”

Tova asked me to give her a moment, and she disappeared into the bathroom. The moment passed and a few more went by, and I was getting a bit anxious. In the meantime, I took from my wallet the rare Austrian stamp in its cellophane wrapper and looked at the woman bathing in the river. More than sixty years had passed since this stamp was printed. The woman was dead, the deer on the riverbank were dead, Austria-Hungary had collapsed, and all that was left was the river, its name unknown. And the stamp. The face value of the stamp was ridiculous, negligible, in comparison with its real worth; that’s what time can do to things. What’s really needed, in my opinion, is a lot more patience. Tova came out looking beautiful, her face washed and her hair groomed. She leaned on me, and we left the restaurant almost arm in arm.

I started telling her about stamp collecting and the business that had brought me to Tel Aviv, for which I would need to part from her in another hour and forty minutes. She took my arm and placed it around her waist. Her hips were warm to the touch. We were in northern Tel Aviv, on the way to the seafront. Somewhere nearby lived Dr. Eliezer M. Berlin. I had come to the city today to do business with him.

On the way to the sea, I asked Tova to tell me something about herself. After all, I’d told her almost my whole life story—Army, lampshades, girls, stamps, poetry—and she hadn’t told me anything, except what was written in the poem. She decided to tease me and began to declaim in the style of a missing-persons announcement on Radio Israel: “Gita, daughter of Lisa and Robert-Reuven Levi, born Bratislava, Slovakia, in 1926, immigrated to Israel via Vienna and the Tyrol in 1946, lived at first in the Jewish Agency orphans’ village, later on a kibbutz in Samaria. Last seen in the company of a muscular kibbutznik, a free agent. Any information, please contact this number. What else do you want to know about me?”

I laughed a little, out of courtesy. In fact, this banter didn’t seem to me particularly funny or clever. I asked her what had happened to her family and what she was doing now—apart, that is, from writing poetry.

Tova told me a few more details about herself, but in a haphazard fashion, so it was hard for me to understand what came first and what came later. Her father was a dentist, her mother a piano teacher. To this day, there were some musical pieces that she couldn’t hear without fleeing out of earshot; otherwise, she said, she started to feel that the only choice she had was between one form of death and another. During the war, she and her family had been imprisoned in a concentration camp. Her father had been killed, her little sister abducted, and her mother sent away to various other camps; no one had survived. She had been assaulted. No, she’d lost her thumb in an accident on the kibbutz—that wasn’t due to the Germans. That was another story. After the war, she’d worked as an instructor in the orphan village. Her poems had been published in several magazines; a first book had already appeared and been well received. She made her living as a graphic artist, designing publicity materials. She liked to work in isolated cafés and at unconventional hours. She was almost in love with me, so she said.

Perhaps I should have written these things down at the start, before everything else. I’m not sure what the right order is.

We arrived at the sea by a roundabout route. We could have cut through the avenues as far as Tuman and made it down to the beach in a few minutes. But Tova wanted us to turn right and walk along Eliezer Ben Yehuda Street, which ran parallel to the shoreline. Several times the wet, tubercular coughing gripped her again, and I was a bit embarrassed in front of the passersby, and Tova noticed this and apologized to me both before the coughing started and when it was over, as she hurried to light a fresh cigarette. We saw fat mothers with prams; sometimes we heard a siren. Once, we paused to watch a muscular butcher bring his cleaver down on a slab of meat to the sound of shattering bones.

At the corner of Jabotinsky Street we met an acquaintance of Tova’s. He was a minuscule, ugly young man, a sort of midget-artist of indeterminate age in tight trousers and a loud shirt. He was almost entirely bald, but what was left of his hair jutted out in front of him like a rebellious quiff or a horn. He also had a mustache of sorts, sparse and drooping. He fell into Tova’s arms, hugging and kissing her, and pretended he was dying of a surfeit of lust, then began joking with her about some poet and literary critic I’d never heard of. It was only when he’d finished abusing that nonentity that he turned to me, looked me up and down impudently, and asked Tova if this was her new lover. Tova said, “Yes, that’s right.”

When we finally got away from this clown, Tova told me that his name was Gunter but everyone called him Gustav and he saw himself as the founder of the absurdist school in Israeli art, but his regular job was with the police force, as a forensic detective, studying cigarette ash and saliva stains and the like. Once, she had loved him very much, because his aggressiveness had seemed to her sterile and almost tragic, too. But now she didn’t love him and didn’t even like meeting him. That was the way it had been in several of her love affairs. She blamed herself. And, meanwhile, life was passing by.

I thought this was the time to compliment her on her beauty, so that she wouldn’t feel that life was passing her by and all was lost. My compliments were gratefully received, and I had to repeat one of them, because Tova kept asking me if it was really true.

Since the conversation had turned to love affairs, I told Tova how an older married woman fell in love with me while I was a soldier on active duty. She came to visit relatives on the kibbutz, saw me on the basketball court, saw me again the following evening in the swimming pool, and the next day she started chasing me around. She was as ugly as a lizard, but since the boys and girls of my age on the kibbutz noticed what was going on, I decided to put on a little display with her, for their benefit. To this day, they tell jokes about that affair.

Tova said, “I’m not your mother and I’m not telling you what to do.”

This remark seemed to me irrelevant and also inappropriate, but I let it go.

Then Tova said that the advertising campaigns she designed for a living felt to her like a form of prostitution.

I told her about the presentation of my commendation and the ceremony that had taken place in the office of the chief of staff, how they’d read out the citation and how my immediate superior had described my crawl to the machine-gun post, and how I couldn’t stop thinking about my friend from Netanya, killed there in Khirbet Zatar, just half a metre from me.

Tova told me about a competition she’d once won: an international competition for graphic artists to design a publicity poster for the U.N., on the subject of freedom and happiness. She had designed the poster with a sense of nausea; freedom and happiness she imagined as fictitious birds from some unbearably sweet children’s story, an insult to the intelligence, and this abomination, of all things, had won the international prize.

As we crossed HaYarkon Street, I decided to show Tova the Austrian stamp and explain to her the importance of the appointment that I would be heading to about an hour from now. I told her about the wonderful pleasure of stamp collecting, about the order that in my eyes is true beauty.

Tova stopped, looked at the approaching sea, and contributed that poetic statement of her own: “God collects us, too, one by one, arranges us, sticks us in his album, and enjoys the harmony that hides behind our suffering.”

I let this go in silence.

Tova said, “I love you,” and we went down the dilapidated steps to the seashore. It was hot. Sweat stuck my shirt to my back. I was thirsty. Her coughing started again. When she calmed down, I showed her the Austrian stamp: a woman bathing in a river, deer on the riverbank.

Near the waterline, there was a gang of little urchins with greasy hair. They greeted us with a crude whistle. I had no intention of letting this insolence go unanswered. I rose to my feet and stood there with arms folded. I’d already taken my shirt off by then. The urchins giggled and went away. I told Tova that I wasn’t showing off, but she had seen it with her own eyes. She laughed. I took a handful of sand and filtered it through my fist onto her trousers, which were a dark blue-gray color. Tova asked me to come and sit down beside her again, now that the urchins had buggered off. I sat.

“One time,” she said, “I entered a competition to design a stamp celebrating the anniversary of the State. I drew an old man and an old woman, a couple, sitting in the middle of an empty field amid thorns and thistles, relaxing in the sunshine. Needless to say, they chose another design. Imagine it: if I’d won, you’d have stuck my stamp in your album and not known anything about it. Would you like to marry me?”

I said, “Pardon?”

Tova said, “The sea, the wandering sand, the sky, the fire, the wind, all full of simple proofs. Why is it that we refuse so stubbornly to be convinced, refuse even to listen—just run, out of breath, from one night to the next, as if death were a party and we mustn’t be late. You, too, are in a hurry to go now. Go, if that’s what you want. I’m not stopping you. Go, exchange your stamps. Sometime you yourself will happen to be the man in the machine-gun post, and a stranger will come crawling toward you, unseen, and kill you before you have time to turn your head. Go. Go now. Goodbye.”

“Tova,” I pleaded, “you’re not well. How can you make big decisions like marriage? You should be in bed. You should stop smoking. Listen to that cough of yours! Listen to it.”

She was silent, and perhaps she really was listening. But in those moments there was no coughing, and no desire, only the sea and the wind and the sun and the sand, and she was beautiful and far away from me.

We drew pictures in the sand. I remembered, in the silence, fragments of what Tova had been telling me on the way to the sea. In the concentration camp, there was a German officer. Tova was a girl of fifteen. This officer was thin and swarthy, and he had sad eyes. In his room, there was a looted Polish piano. He let her play it. He used to listen and weep with emotion, then he would take off his black leather belt and order her to flog him; contemptible creatures such as he was deserved no pity. She had to flog him with all her strength, and if she didn’t flog hard enough he would burn her skin with his cigarette: “Look here, on the arm, on the neck, in other places that you’re not going to see.” He was an unhappy man. He had a big Alsatian called Heine, and this dog hated Jews; it could sniff them out anywhere and bite them.

On the kibbutz, she had a very handsome boyfriend, one of the sleeping princes of the valley, named Arnon. He could walk on his hands with his feet waving in the air.

I reckoned that this was the time to tell her: “Not only can I walk on my hands; I can climb stairs on my hands.”

“Liar,” Tova said. “If you can, then show me. Yes, here, right now.”

I hesitated. And suddenly she touched the nape of my neck with her damaged hand and I was in her power entirely. I stood up, kicked off my shoes, did a backflip in the air, landed on my hands, and started walking. My muscles obeyed me lightly and precisely, without contortion or effort. All the old women in deck chairs stretched out their turtle necks and looked at me in Yiddish. There were whistles and also some applause. A shapely girl tourist said “Oh là là” in a French accent. I ignored these compliments and returned to Tova. She was smoking.

“You’re cute,” she said.

“Maybe now I’ve earned a kiss from you,” I said.

But Tova smiled and kissed her cigarette and said to me, “Wait, little boy.”

I had to think of the time. And when she looked away I glanced hurriedly at my watch. I had a quarter of an hour left.

“Let’s assume you’ve agreed to marry me,” she said with a laugh. “Imagine that you’ve agreed. Do you know what we’ll do once you’ve agreed?”

“Go and get registered, buy a ring, tell our friends and relations.”

“No. We’re going to go farther along the coast to a place where there’s no one else, just us and the water and the evening light, because it will be evening when we get there. Then we’ll take off our clothes and go in the water. I’ll write a poem about you. You’ll take me to Khirbet Zatar and show me how heroic you were. And in the night we’ll come back to the sea and you can stick stamps on the water all night long and I’ll watch you and laugh.”

“Tova,” I said, “now you’re not being serious. I really have to go. Be serious for a moment. If you have a phone number, let me have it now, and if I have to come to the city again on lampshade business I’ll get in touch and we can go out together.”

She found no answer to this; instead, she was seized by a fit of coughing. The cigarette flew from her fingers and landed in the sand. Her face reddened, and spittle dripped from her mouth. The thumbless hand flailed helplessly in the air. She dropped her little straw bag and its contents spilled out. I didn’t know if I was supposed to pick up the scattered items or slap her on the back. I decided not to slap her, since she had asked me several times not to touch her. I waited, but this time the coughing didn’t pass; it only grew worse, to the point where I was assailed by nausea. As the nausea tightened its grip, my desire mounted, too, until I didn’t know what would become of me.

At last she relaxed, but I couldn’t relax. She asked me to forgive her. I forgave her at once.

Then we parted, and I’ll never see her again.

I have to record things in order. Not skip over the last moments, but record them, too. How this sudden manic impulse—to probe her damaged hand, to submit to her, to follow her, to marry her—was so strong that it was painful.

And how I said to her, “It’s O.K. I can be a bit late. Maybe the stamp dealer will wait for me. Let’s go to that place you talked about, or to your room.” And how, instead of being happy, Tova decided to smoke more and more. Cigarette after cigarette, as her lungs contracted with pain. She stood there facing me, clutching at her throat with nine fingers, gasping, trying to recite her poem, dripping saliva flecked with blood. As if the words of the poem were a doctor’s prescription or the name of some medication that could rescue her from the paroxysms: All rivers—cough—flow—cough—all—cough cough—goes there, and there is only—cough cough—the moribund—

I could restrain myself no longer.

I seized her arm, then both of her hands, shaking her and shouting at her, telling her that she must stop this, she was acting crazy, she was sick, the noises she was making were unbearable, she should go home, and I had to leave, too. She had no right to pick on a stranger like this and lay the responsibility on him.

She tore herself roughly from my grasp and stood wheezing, already inhaling the smoke of a new cigarette.

“Wait,” she said in a feeble voice, “wait. It’ll come to you, too. Yes, you’re very strong, you’re strong and athletic, you can walk on your hands, blow up bunkers. But this won’t help you, because someday your body is going to betray you. And then you’ll remember how I warned you against him, you’ll see. You pamper this wonderful body of yours, making sure that no harm comes to him, but he’s a traitor. One night he’ll stab you with a dagger of pain and you’ll remember what I’m telling you. You’ll squirm in pain, and you’ll cry out and plead, but he’ll thrust knife after knife into you. Everything you’ve done for him he’ll forget. You’ll open your eyes in panic in the dark and he’ll kill you. In the middle of the night, when there’s no one with you. No mother or father, no kibbutz and no woman. Just you and your murderer in the night, and no power in the world can stop him. You will die. Now try to run away, fool, run away now if you can, run on your hands, run on your head, run with all your strength, fool, so I never have to see you again. Run.”

She wept. Her voice was inaudible and her face wasn’t contorted. Only her eyes filled, and I didn’t know what to do. The sea was there. It was hot; it was late. I told her that I had to go now and we should try to part as friends. She smiled at me, leaned forward slightly, and began to puke all over me. With a flourish, almost with dedication, with loud retches.

I fled without another word.

By the public showers, I cleaned myself up as best I could.

Dr. Eliezer M. Berlin I met as he was on his way out: the deadline had passed and another collector had beaten me to it. Another time, perhaps. What a shame. Goodbye and good luck. Don’t mention it.

At five, I left Tel Aviv. By six, I’d reached Haifa. Before eight in the evening, I was already in the shower cubicle attached to my room, soaping myself thoroughly, having thrown all my clothes in the laundry bag. I decided to scrub my head, too. After that, I ate salad and bread, but without appetite. I listened to a flute concerto and drank a glass of vermouth. I hung a sign on the door: “Please do not disturb—not a free agent this evening.” The girls didn’t come, or perhaps they came, read the sign, and went away. The rare Austrian stamp I put back safely in its place. A woman bathing in a river. Deer on the riverbank.

Then I leafed through my albums and decided that I should record in order everything that had happened to me during the day. What I have recorded isn’t in order, and I haven’t managed to record everything.

Now there’s a circle of light on my desk. The heavy album with decorative binding from Warsaw is open at the page for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Now there’s no Bosnia and no Herzegovina, and the last stamp on the page is the last of all. Outside, total silence, besides the crickets and the frogs. I have no complaints. Not against her, not against myself, not against stamp collectors. I think quietly about rivers: springs form rivulets; from rivulets, tributaries are formed; tributaries join and create rivers; and all rivers flow into the sea. The sea remains. The question is, Where does it come from, this sudden and intense desire to die this very moment? ♦

—1963

(Translated, from the Hebrew, by Philip Simpson.)