Title: Evensong
Author: Laurie Colwin

My husband, John Felix, and I live, with our ten-year-old daughter, Alice, on the bottom two floors of a brownstone, in the neighborhood of an Anglican seminary, a collection of Gothic buildings and a lawn. In the spring, it is possible to watch priests and their families playing croquet on the grass. In summer, vaporous smoke from their tiny barbecues wafts through our front windows. If you were a complete psycho and could not tell one thing from another, the orderly workings of this place—its piper on St. Andrew’s Day, its Christmas procession and Easter picnic—would remind you that the season had changed, and you would know, because the hours are marked by bell ringing, what time it was at least five times a day. Even those who pay absolutely no attention to the institution are affected by it, if for no other reason than because on clear nights you can hear the organist practicing in the chapel.

Our lives—the lives of the Felix family—are also informed by Louis and Emily Billiards, whom we have known for years. Louis is a dealer in fine antique English and French furniture. His shop is in our neighborhood, and it was he who found the wonderful place in which we now live. Before we lived here, we lived right next door to the Billiards family, and we are very connected. Emily, who is the head of production at a publishing company, helped me get my first job as a book designer. When I became pregnant with Alice, Emily sent me to her doctor, and when Alice was a baby, Emily and Louis’s daughter, Janet, babysat for us. Meanwhile, their son, Peter, graduated from college and needed advice about banking, which my husband, John, who works on Wall Street, was happy to give. When I quit my job, Emily helped me find freelance work. Louis also sold us our walnut dining-room table and fruitwood sideboard at a good price. How much we owe to Emily and Louis! Sometimes when I cannot sleep at night I am tortured, as if by bedbugs or red ants, at the size of this debt.

This account of what we owe the Billiards family is one of many lists. I am by nature a person whose constant battle against encroaching chaos is fought by list-making and organizational thinking. I make grocery lists that cover our immediate needs, our staple needs, our long-term needs, and our long-term needs of a special nature, such as a dinner party a month away. I know what I will serve at a dinner party a month away. Of course, in order to make these lists, plans must be made. My family tells me that I can sometimes be seen baring my teeth or muttering to myself as I make these lists.

For a while, my list-making was complicated by the fact that I had stumbled into a love affair with Louis Billiards (some way to pay Emily back for all her kindness!). Louis likes ginger ale, for example. No one in the Felix family will touch it. The same goes for gherkins, which Louis adores, and liverwurst. The trick was to coördinate the bringing of these items into our fridge with Louis coming for lunch.

I spent many hours of each day thinking as follows: If Louis turns up for lunch and eats the boiled potatoes, we will have to have rice with parsley and butter with dinner, but if he does not eat the potatoes we can have potato salad, which goes so much better with roast chicken. If Louis does not drink the ginger ale, or eat the Niçoise olives, or if he finishes the broccoli soup—and so on.

On the other hand, John and I are sort of hopeless around the house and are constantly paying workmen to come and do simple things like change the screens in the spring or fix the filter on the air-conditioner in the summer. It was Louis who eventually did these things. He made the list. He put Mortite around the back windows in the fall, and he put the screens up in the spring, and one day, when John was away on business and Alice was on one of her overnight class trips, Louis took down the pantry door and planed it. When he rehung it, it opened and closed perfectly. Emily, who is extremely competent, often beats Louis to the punch when it comes to household work—doubtless the reason he was having an affair with me.

In a love affair, it is usually the lover who is handsome and the husband who is not, whereas it was just the reverse in my case. John is exceptionally good-looking—tall, wavy-haired, lean, and fine-featured. Louis is a little shorter than I am, and bald, with a fringe of white hair. He has been weather-beaten to the color of teak and smells of cigars and furniture polish. Unlike my husband, who looks ravishing in his banker’s suits, Louis plods around in worn chino trousers, blue work shirts, an old corduroy jacket, and suède desert boots. During the many hours I spent pondering my activities with Louis, it occurred to me that elements of the father-daughter relationship must obtain in an affair in which the man is old enough (or almost old enough) to be the woman’s father. Of course, it also occurred to me that Louis was nothing whatsoever like my father, who was not bald, did not smoke cigars, was pale, and preferred to be rather formally dressed. But of course it does not matter if the person is like one’s father. It matters that the person be fatherly. As I watched Louis weather-strip our back windows, I could not help but feel that he was something of a father to both me and John, although I knew that couldn’t be right.

It is said that there are always four people in a love affair of this sort, the lovers and their spouses. It is also said that when two people go to bed together their parents are right there with them. Moreover, there is a saying that it often takes three to make a marriage. What a mob! And all because Louis and I were having a love affair.

Louis is a descendant of someone named Francis-Hugo Billiards, one of the founders of the neighborhood seminary. It was either coincidence, or fate, or divine guidance that led Louis to have a shop almost directly across the street from this institution. This forebear is the author of the hymn “In His Pasture May I Graze (That His Love May E’er Secure Me),” No. 214 in the hymnal supplement. One is encouraged to sing it “with flowing rhythm.”

All these connections prove that everything, somehow or other, is in order. Life is infinitely rich, and infinitely interconnected. In the twilight of an early-fall or spring evening, I like to sit on the front steps with my daughter and watch our neighbors. Our street pulsates with individuality: rare breeds of dogs, strange modes of dress. No one even walks like anyone else. It occurs to me as I sit that everyone in the world is born with a personality and is fully entitled to express it. The planet is a-spin with notions, phobias, inclinations, tastes, ideas, creeds, beliefs, and behaviors of all kinds. Often this thought is uplifting and fills my heart with what feels like rich blood. If I stopped any of these people and questioned them closely, we would be sure to have a friend, an experience, a relative in common.

There is just no getting away from the complexity of human life. We are a tide pool, teeming with varieties of species. No matter which way you turn—on the bus, in the supermarket, sitting in a coffee shop—you are surrounded by people making idiosyncratic choices about this and that. Sometimes this all gives me a headache, and I reflect on what a pain in the neck people are.

My love affair with Louis began when he started to renovate his shop. He acquired a second shop next door and broke through a wall to connect them. Since I live in the neighborhood, and since I felt I owed the Billiardses so profound a debt, I volunteered to open the shop early in the morning for the workmen. It was the least that I could do. Had they not found us our dwelling? Our doctors? Did we not use products recommended by them? Their daughter as a babysitter? Had they not helped us get a good price on our beautiful Persian rug?

The renovations began early in September. One day in late October, I stopped by to see what progress had been made and to have a cup of tea with Louis. It was Alice’s afternoon to have her ballet class, after which she always had dinner at her little friend Annie Shepherd’s. After their afternoon of field sports, Annie Shepherd often came to us for dinner. How beautifully ordered are the lives of children!

The workmen had gone home. The street was empty. A thought flew into my head and I expressed it. I said, “I think I come to visit you too much.” After all, I honestly had no interest in Louis’s renovations, and yet I felt drawn to his shop.

Then Louis said, in a tone I had never heard from him before, “I don’t think you visit often enough.”

I was covered with shame to find that my heart had begun to pound in my chest. Louis got out of his chair and locked the door. He hung up a sign that said “CLOSED.” I followed him into the musty basement where he stored new shipments and furniture that needed repair or reupholstering. There, under a clean packing quilt, on a wide chaise that was to be reupholstered in pale-blue linen, we committed adultery. Nowadays, it gives me a pang to walk into a neighbor’s house and see some piece of furniture that Louis and I once misbehaved on.

As to the cause of this love affair, well, cause was not my thing, really. Feeling was more up my street, as they say. This alliance had a preordained, familial feeling to it that I found irresistible—the combination of innocence and intimate knowledge you get at a family reunion.

One winter afternoon, when Louis and I had emerged from a tattered empire sofa in the basement, the seminary bells began to ring, reminding us that it was five o’clock.

“You know,” I said conversationally, “We’ve lived here for almost ten years and I still don’t know what those bells signify.”

With this, Louis dragged me to my feet, wrapped me in my coat, switched off the lights, locked up his store, and led me out into the street. He walked me right through the seminary gates and toward the chapel.

“From couch to church!” he said jauntily.

I stopped on the path and would not move. Louis seemed right at home on the seminary grounds—being, after all, the descendant of a founder—but I was not. Furthermore, it was clear he was going to take me into the chapel, and I did not think it right to enter a religious structure after having been to bed with a man who was not my husband.

“Furthermore, I am not a Christian,” I said.

“Pish-tush,” Louis said. “You’re a poor excuse for a Jew, and so is that husband of yours.”

This was certainly true. John and I were the most watered-down of Jews, raised by diluted Jews who did not know how to be Jewish at all. As a result, John was sent to a Quaker school, I was sent to a school that embraced all faiths, and the two of us had put in some time at the Sunday schools of reformed congregations where, for the most part, we passed notes, chewed gum, and saw our little friends from dance class. Out of a sincere but confused longing to establish in our child some sense of cultural identification, we sent her to a Sunday school from which she appeared spouting the names of holidays we had not known existed, and patiently instructing us in various religious matters as best she could. Each year, we had a secular Christmas, and more advanced Jewish friends invited us to Passover dinners.

“I won’t know where to put my feet,” I said, balking at the chapel door.

“We’ll sit in the back and no one will know what an infidel you are.”

“Infidel does not cover what I am,” I said.

“Now, now,” Louis said. “No melodrama. God loves us in our sins. Be a good girl. Take a deep breath and move.” He gave me a little shove and I flew up the stairs and into the chapel.

The last light came through the stained-glass windows, but the rest of the chapel was dim. The altar was lit with candles. I was immediately overcome with that undeniable, elevating melancholy so many people feel in a religious setting.

I found myself sitting in a pew, staring in panic at the row of books in front of me: the hymnal, the supplement to the hymnal, a book of canticles, the Book of Common Prayer, and a paperbound book with the seminary’s name stamped on it, which when opened revealed itself to be full of hand-transcribed music.

“What am I supposed to do?” I said.

“Just look at the nice pictures in the windows and then stand when I stand and kneel when I kneel.”

“Kneel?” I said. “Do I have to kneel? I feel it would be a betrayal of my Jewishness to kneel.”

Louis gave me an indulgent look. “What future for the Jews?” he said. “You can stand. It’s the alternative method.”

I sat in my place and watched the community file in. Many of these people were familiar to me—recent or longtime neighbors whom I saw at least once a day. And yet they had been going about this particular piece of business right under my nose. How secret are even the open lives of others!

I saw the nice red-haired man I always said hello to at the newsstand, although I had never seen him in a clerical collar before. He was standing with his wife, whom I always saw in the supermarket. At the last minute, a tall Black man in flowing African garb walked in. This man lived on our street with his wife and two daughters. His wife, too, wore African clothes, with a winter coat on top when it was cold. In this costume she looked terribly homesick, and seeing them on the street as a family made me homesick, too. You would not find this woman having an unexplained love affair with an old friend.

The organist began to play. Louis elbowed me in the side to get me to stand. As I stood, I could see a procession emerge from the back of the chapel—a line of people, mostly men, in academic robes.

“Who are they?” I whispered, as they took their places.

“The deans and teachers,” Louis said into my ear. “Now hush. It’s beginning.”

A disembodied male voice floated from the back of the chapel and began to chant:

The congregation, Louis included, chanted back:

Tears came into my eyes. I wanted to throw my coat over my head and sob. The chant continued, but I was too concerned with not disgracing Louis by crying.

The organ then played a note, and a pure, high woman’s voice began to sing:

Louis had opened all the right books to all the right places, but the print swam in front of me. During the singing of the Psalms, a line hovered up before me: “Do not hand over the life of your dove to wild beasts.” And during the singing of the Magnificat I was brought up short by the line “He hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.”

I stood there mute and awash in emotions of many sorts, among them shock that Louis knew this service like the back of his hand and seemed on very chummy terms with his Creator.

We heard readings from the Old and New Testaments. We chanted prayers both standing and kneeling. Then the organ sounded and a hymn was sung. To my surprise, the tune was familiar, the chorale from a Bach cantata.

Finally, we received a benediction and filed out into the autumn night. The air was crisp and filled with woodsmoke.

“John is in Chicago, isn’t he?” Louis asked.

“Until tomorrow.” I felt I was having trouble speaking.

“And Alice?”

“She’s at Annie Shepherd’s for supper.”

“Well, then,” Louis said. “Feed me. Emily’s at an A.G.A. meeting.” The A.G.A., of which Emily was chairwoman, was the Association of Graphic Artists, to which I in fact belonged—at Emily’s suggestion—although I never went to meetings. I did not want to have a meal alone. In the darkness, the seminarians looked like furtive animals scurrying for home. The windows on the other side of the street were full of warm, yellow light. All this made me feel the kind of awful loneliness you feel in childhood at twilight.

In the fridge I had leftover stew, eggplant-and-pepper conserve, and rice salad. I wished Louis had not been my lover, so that I could have the luxury of sharing leftovers in a guilt-free atmosphere with an old friend.

We had our meal, during which Alice called to ask if I would pick her up or if I wanted the Shepherds to walk her home. I said I would pick her up.

“If only she knew what her mother was,” I said to Louis.

“What is her mother?” Louis said blandly. “Oh, I see. A woman taken in adultery. Now, now. You’re a nice girl, and you’re not much different from anyone else.”

“Do you think those seminarians go around having sexual encounters in the afternoon with old friends?”

“I wouldn’t be at all surprised,” Louis said. “That place is a hotbed of all sorts of emotional misbehavior.”

Louis’s perspective on life was very consoling to me. He was old enough to take the long view. Life unrolled before him like a Persian runner. He observed and enjoyed, without filling his head with a million unnecessary questions.

“How does anyone keep all those books straight?” I said.

“Practice,” Louis said.

“How come you know that service so well?”

“I went there,” Louis said.

“You what?”

“When I was a little boy,” he said. “I mean a little boy in my twenties. I thought I might become a clergyman, but I decided not to.”

I was stunned by this piece of news.

“Why did you decide not to?” I asked.

“Oh, Papa was getting on, and he thought it would be nice to leave such a flourishing trade to me. I love furniture, and I liked having an excuse to go to England and France three times a year. It’s a nice, civilized business. The life of most clergymen is a nasty one. They are either constantly saying what they don’t mean or searching to find out what they do mean, and they don’t make any money and they lose their faith. Besides, I’m too much of a sybarite.”

“Nobody knows anything about anybody,” I said sadly.

“Nonsense,” Louis said. “People know plenty. Do you really want to know every little thing? Don’t you ever want anyone to surprise you?”

Actually, I did not. I wanted to know everything all at once. In fact, I was often brought to tears by the thought that my darling Alice, my own flesh and blood, had dreams, and a school life, and thoughts to which I had no access whatsoever.

“For instance,” Louis said. “I didn’t know you knew any hymns.”

“I didn’t, either,” I said.

“Well, hymns are like that,” Louis said. “Catchy.”

It was time to pick up Alice. Louis walked me into the night, up the street, and to the Shepherds’ corner. I thanked him for taking me to Evensong.

“All that standing and kneeling,” he said. “Just like exercise.”

From that time on, my life assumed a slightly different pattern. I had tea, or what we euphemistically called tea, with Louis a few times a week, and on the days that Alice stayed late at school for French conversation, or sports, or went to ballet or to her piano lesson, I found myself in chapel for Evensong. Perhaps I was merely killing time. After all, I did my work in the morning; my child did not come home some days till after five; my husband did not come home until seven; and Louis was not always available. Besides, I was fond of music and liked to sing. Evensong gave me plenty of both.

One afternoon in Louis’s basement, I said, “Isn’t it funny, Louis? Here we are together, and your Janet used to babysit for our Alice.”

“An arrangement that could easily be revived if we ran off together,” he said, leaning over me to get a cigarillo out of his jacket pocket. A chill passed over my heart. The tip of the iceberg is a most terrifying sight. I looked at Louis, who was smoking contentedly, and said, “Do you really think we should run off together?”

“Certainly not, you silly girl,” he said. “I was attempting to make an entertaining remark.”

Who knows why this entertaining remark set off such a depth charge in me. Perhaps I harbored a longing to run off with Louis. After all, if the other is unknowable, then the self is unknowable as well. It is almost better to go through life with eyes half closed than to have unpredictable parts spring up out of oneself like mushrooms after a rain.

Walking home from the shop, I came across the African family strolling down the street. The father, splendid in his batiks, with a brown overcoat; the mother, wearing a short coat with a fur collar over her tribal dress; and the two little girls, in braids and school uniforms. You won’t find any love dalliances going on in that mob, I thought.

At the start of spring, Louis went abroad on one of his buying trips, and when he came back it was clear that he had made a decision about me: our love dalliance was over. He did not lead me down to his basement to entwine illicitly in packing quilts. Instead, we sat upstairs and had tea, which Louis brewed on his hot plate. I did not question the wisdom of this decision, doubtless because I was relieved not to have had to make it myself, and because emotional scenes were spared. Also, I deferred to Louis’s fatherly guidance.

But when I was alone I was often assailed by fear. Perhaps I had done or said something Louis found disgusting. Perhaps he found me disgusting. Perhaps he was ill, or Emily had discovered our affair, or he had told her everything. In a more paranoid moment, I imagined that Louis had had an affair with me solely to get me into chapel and thereby convert me.

One afternoon, I blurted, “Why did you drop me, Louis?”

“I didn’t drop you,” Louis said. “We’re having tea, aren’t we?”

“I mean, why don’t we ever sleep together anymore?” I said.

“It was never the right thing to do,” Louis said. His eyes were mild and kind, and it was quite impossible to see behind them. He was not going to say another word on the subject, and I was going to be left to contemplate this welter of possibilities forever.

And so I saw Louis for tea once a week. I picked Alice up at school. I attended Evensong. The service became an addiction. Was it the fact that only the music changed, that certain prayers followed certain canticles which followed certain readings? Or was it the music and the setting, which were so curiously soothing and emotional? I puttered around the house singing “O Blest Creator of the Light.” At times, I said to myself aloud, “Lighten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord,” which, according to the Book of Common Prayer, is part of a collect for aid against perils.

As the light changed, the stained-glass windows revealed themselves. As the buds came out, little leaves made a speckled pattern on Adam, Eve, and the serpent. It occurred to me that it would be hard to explain what a Jewish girl, even a very watered-down one, was doing at five o’clock in the afternoon in a chapel singing “O Trinity of Blessed Light.” It did not seem to be the religious angle that I was after. I had quite enough trouble with the concept of one God. Three-in-one was much too confusing to contemplate.

Then one day I had an actual revelation. It came to me that I might never know very much about anything. It might never be imparted to me what I was doing at Evensong. “The thing about the unknowable,” I said to myself, “is that you have to accept that it just isn’t knowable, and that’s that.” I found this very relaxing.

On a beautiful evening late in April, I came out of Evensong and bumped right into my husband, my very own John. I was amazed to see him, and he looked back at me with pain and puzzlement on his face.

“Oh, hello!” I said brightly, as to a new neighbor. “How did you know where I was?”

“Last night, when I came home early, I saw you come out,” he said. “I got home early tonight, and I thought I’d come and pick you up and find out what’s going on.”

“Nothing’s going on,” I said.

“You’re not converting, are you?” he asked. He looked terribly worried.

“Of course not, silly,” I said. “It’s nice in there. I like to sing. It reminds me of my Jewish heritage. I’ve been thinking that we ought to take more part in Alice’s religious upbringing and go to Friday-night services every once in a while. I also think we should have a proper Passover next year.”

“That’s a wonderful idea,” John said. He was very relieved. God knows what he had thought. I was not going to know; I was not even going to know what I thought.

I took John’s arm, and we walked slowly down the street toward Alice’s school. It was a sports afternoon. The school was a nice, brisk walk away. It was a treat for her to be picked up by her father. It was a treat to have him home early on such a lovely spring night. We walked with our arms around each other. When we got to the school, we would find Alice in her sports clothes, with her school uniform in a canvas carryall. Her answer those days to the question “What did you do today?” was “Nothing very interesting.”

Then we would walk home, the three of us, through the front door and into our privacy, as close and as distant as any connected people are. ♦