Title: Finistère
Author: Kevin Barry

The big man was in a condition of thrilling remorse. He was brokenhearted again at fifty-five and loving it. He leaned against the rail on the top deck of the Cork-Roscoff ferry and shook woefully from side to side his heavy, handsome ginger head and the cries of a seal pup rose softly from the hollows of his chest. Sylvia had been abandoned that morning in County Clare and would get over him before the leaves were off the trees; Cian John Wynn would never get over himself. He raised his head and wiped away the tears and watched Ireland recede into the afternoon haze and he prayed that it would stay there. He knew it would be a long time before he went home again.

It was early September in a fine spell. The day was calm and the Celtic Sea ran smoothly on streaks of white-gray lustre. He walked the deck in a bliss of painful nostalgia—the ferry felt as if it had sailed directly from the nineteen-eighties. There was the same old idiot noise of the arcade games from below, and Dexys Midnight Runners still played on the Tannoy, and a gaggle of French and Irish teen-agers in high-waisted denim worked up their flirtations in the giddy-making salt breeze—they had fifteen hours yet to Finistère.

He descended the decks to escape the hormones. He had a widow’s peak and a weakness for contemporary tweeds. He found a quiet corner at Le Café and took a red wine. His moods were swift and ever changing and the thrill of his escape fell away now on a quick grade to emptiness. A familiar void opened up within. He gave out to himself a little and then some more and in fact for a while he argued half seriously against his own existence. Then he gathered his resources somewhat. He drank slowly and judiciously. He tried to read his novel but the words would not fix on the page. Soon a slight girl of about fourteen or fifteen years sat at the table nearest to him. She flipped open a MacBook and scowled into it for a few moments and then looked vaguely in his direction.

“Wi-Fi’s bullshit,” she said.

“Ah, right,” he said.

“I mean, even the fucking Netflix won’t stream?”

He smiled sadly in understanding and returned to his Rachel Cusk but still the words swam and he became quite tense as the girl tapped at the keys and mumbled darkly and much too quickly.

“The gouging bastards,” she said. “What it is is they’re charging, like, a premium rate for a connection you can actually stream off, like fifteen fucking euros?”

A bit off, he thought. Some kind of spectrum. He tried not to engage but couldn’t help himself.

“What’s it you’re trying to watch?”

“ ‘World’s Toughest Prisons,’ ” she said. “Season 7 just dropped.”

He knew not to continue the conversation. A man travelling alone in his morbid fifties does not talk to a girl in her teens without family or guardian in sight, especially not in this black romantic mood and certainly not with a bottle of Château Despair on the go.

“What did you make of Season 6?” he said. “Like that Bosnia and Herzegovina ep?”

“Aw, man,” she said. “Those Slav cats get fucking medieval, yeah?”

For the first time she smiled and it was a wide-open and beautiful and death-defying smile.

•

He had been aware of Sylvia for some time as an aloof presence around the edges of openings and first nights. He knew that she was involved with design, with live poetry, and with a scheme to reintroduce the wolf to the province of Connacht. She was pale and tall and really very good-looking, superbly dressed, and forbiddingly difficult to flirt with. He had taken one demeaning scowl too many from her direction and was like a dog after a stick. He ran into her at the launch of a lounge chair in Galway in late April with just the right amount of booze under his belt and somehow he made her laugh. He knew then to swiftly make his exit and he looked back over his shoulder and smoldered ironically and she laughed again. He found that very moving. The situation took fully in May and was ecstatic in all the usual ways by early June. Mostly it was a lakeside romance back at her place in north Clare with dragonflies and sunlight through the reeds at dusk and all that. Little tractors fucking about on the line of the horizon—gorgeous. During those first weeks they talked extravagantly, constantly—there were gales and gales of talk—and they found delight and comfort in their shared positions, intrigue and interest in their disagreements; they talked busily over breakfast, all through the day, while they cooked, when they walked, at night after making love. Now and not the length of the season later he couldn’t remember anything they’d talked about—he could not remember a single fucking word of it.

•

On the open sea the sun burned through a thin veil of cloud and the light on the water made a carnival glister. In the quiet corner of Le Café he turned his chair from the sea view and from the light.

“They get sniffy as motherfuckers about it,” the girl said.

“This is your parents?”

“Yeah,” she said. “They’re, like, We just don’t want you watching jail shit?”

“You should watch whatever you like whenever you like,” he said.

“Thank you,” she said.

“And never trust good taste.”

“Why not?”

“It’s herd opinion,” he said. “Good taste can be good taste only if a lot of people agree on it.”

“I’m with you, fella.”

“Anyway,” he said, “incarceration is a perfectly valid area of study. I mean, look at the way the world is headed?”

“Totally,” she said. “Like, we’re all going to end up someone’s bitch sooner rather than later?”

“I have absolutely no doubt about that,” he said. “We should be prepared for what’s coming.”

•

The more comfortable Sylvia grew with his presence in her house the less he slept, and the summer began to age disagreeably. The hours of darkness were short, the nights endless. He tossed and flopped in the bed like a great fat dying trout and he was apparently resolved to eat his own jaws. He convened all night with the dreary troops of his significant dead. He lay there honking stress and getting zero fucking cell repair while Sylvia beside him slept entirely without effort in a summer night shroud made of hemp. He listened to the even calm of her repose, almost breathless it seemed, and he watched her perfect profile as she lay on her back, hands clasped at the belly as though arrayed for a burial, like some holy martyr, and he took this performance as a personal affront. He watched the new gray light creep along the edge of the picture window beneath the shade. There were odd pulses like worms at the base of his throat. There were strange olden words on his lips as he lay mumbling against the last of the night. Mostly he gave up on even the attempt at sleep and hobbled down the floating stairs like a man after coming through a war. He watched with unnameable dread as the unforgiving dawn approached with stealth across the stone-wall fields. He drew the curtains against the new morning and once more took up the laptop.

In the course of the love affair he had gone through five seasons of “Yellowstone” without regret and, in truth, by September he was not unaware that a new season of “World’s Toughest Prisons” was about to drop.

•

The girl wore baggy, indeterminable clothes in the penitent, contemporary style and in the hot-neon tones lately smuggled in tunnels from 1983. The sunlight through the café windows moved gaily and bounced. She blocked her eyes against the light and squinted hard.

“There’s a kind of weird energy off you,” she said.

“This is not an original observation,” he said.

“I imagine not,” she said. “And maybe you’re a tiny bit scary, actually?”

“Really?” he said. “You think so?”

“Could be it’s just the eyebrows,” she said.

“Now it gets personal,” he said.

“They are on the baroque side,” she said.

He turned to the window and checked his reflection against the sun’s glare.

“Another little part of me just died,” he said.

“Have another drink,” she said. “You’ve been counting the sips on that one.”

“O.K.,” he said. “You need supervision. Where are your folks?”

“ ‘Folks,’ ” she said, drawing the quote marks in the air. “I mean, I have to fucking dig it.”

•

In the wake of lovemaking Cian John Wynn was a sobbing, grateful mess and usually had to be consoled for several minutes. After two months with Sylvia this had begun to take its toll. She accused him of affectation, and worse. In the bed she now turned her back to him and flung accusations over her shoulder. Hoarsely he denied that he had ever been a tramp. On the Saturday of the August bank-holiday weekend she bit his chin in a way that went beyond playful. He left the house with the eyes of a small wounded deer and gunned his Tesla and vowed that he would never return. He was back at twenty past five the next morning roaring into her letter box. Surely as the seasons turned the relationship was on the old inevitable tilt—he tried to deny the sway of it. Now for a change he lay sleepless in the bushes outside. She let him back in the house by breakfast and he proposed over the shakshuka eggs. Tearfully Sylvia accepted at once. There were two of them in it. They clasped each other’s hands and stood trembling together in the brutalist kitchen extension. As August proceeded the vicinity took on a swampish jungle heat that was ominous as it drifted across the fields and somehow had the reek of the grave to it and what was left of his sleep was dispersed to the four winds. Now he took fuckloads of pills against the sleeplessness and he got cranky as an old cat from them. Sylvia, in the meantime, was high and joyous on the buzz of the new engagement and she laughed a great deal in the evenings when she arrived back from her design project or the wolves or whatever the fuck she was up to. The laughter seemed out of character. Or at least there was something about the way she laughed. She always tossed her head back when she did so and now every time she did it he thought, A show pony. She’s tossing her fucking head again like a fucking show pony. And there was the way she insisted on sharing whatever bullshit was making her laugh on her phone. She would approach gagging with laughter, almost folding up with it, and she’d say, “You’ve got to . . . You’ve just got to . . . This . . . This is going to destroy you, Cian. . . .”

“It’s probably not really, Sylvia.”

“No, seriously. . . . You’ve just got to . . .”

And he would beam in compliance at some dancing fucking cat or some episode of domestic slapstick in Athlone or someplace horrendous and think, Yeah, well, we might not actually see the Christmas out of this one.

•

The ferry surged against the swell and they made a sure progress for the Continent. The light thickened as the evening came down. The sea took on an inkiness. The sky was vast and lyric and impressive.

“Spectrum?” the girl said. “I’m on all the fucking spectrums.”

“I know the way,” he said.

“I mean, they haven’t put a name to it precisely but it’s generally agreed that I have a tendency to”—she did the air quotes again—“ ‘obliterate the social contract.’ ”

“Lovely,” he said.

“There have been an amount of referrals,” she said. “But you know what these people are like.”

“These people?”

“Oh, you know,” she said. “The therapists. Et cetera.”

“I don’t, actually,” he said. “I’ve never been.”

She let her jaw hang in a gesture of astonished collapse.

“You?” she said. “Have never been? To therapy?”

“I wouldn’t see the point of it,” he said.

“Why not?”

“Because there’d only be a point to it if I was to fully engage and be entirely present in the process and truthful. I’d have to tell the person what was going on in my head at all times. And I couldn’t do that.”

“Why not?”

“Because they’d have me committed to a locked facility and they’d throw away the key.”

“Please don’t take my daddy away!” she cried.

“O.K.,” he said.

“Anyway, that’s not how therapy works,” she said. “Like, telling them everything in your head? Are you fucking crazy?”

•

He could not have expected the histrionics of that morning’s final breakup with Sylvia. He thought the situation would simply exhaust itself—he had exhausted many another before. Instead a mild grumbling about the consistency of the overnight oats suddenly escalated and they were both on their feet with the amps switched on. She accused him of the most heinous things—of being pat and flippant and blithe and of faking suicidal ideation for effect. He said in turn that he believed her character was essentially vampiric and that he could not be her sustenance. At that she climbed over the kitchen island and cornered him among the crockery and the pans and he told her that their time together had been a wonderful gift and she hit him on the ear with a box grater.

“Sylvia, really,” he said.

For a finish the guards were called and tawdry recitals of the situation were performed by both parties—you could put her on the fucking stage—and of course the guards turned on him and issued the usual stern injunctions.

“It all went filthy on me again,” he told the girl.

“More details,” she said.

“No,” he said. “Let’s just say I am technically at this moment under advisement not to reënter the townland of Ennistymon.”

•

The girl’s eyes were astonishingly bright. They burned with this strange frankness and with a sly ingenuity. There was something antique, too, something almost elfin, as per an encounter in the forest gloom. Verbally dexterous, she maintained as carefully as she could her front—the hard lines of tension that showed in her neck betrayed that front. He felt that things might go either way for her yet. She looked up now with a flick of anxiety.

“O.K.,” she said. “The mama approaches.”

He picked up his novel as though to read and mimed a frown of concentration at the Cusk and took a sip of wine.

An efficient-looking woman in a no-nonsense fleece jacket appeared. She spoke low and urgently to the girl, who replied with hand flaps and little barks of reassurance. As the woman departed she seemed to rake a glance over him, seemed about to pause, but moved on again. As soon as she was out of sight—

“Let’s play secrets,” the girl said.

“Oh, let’s seriously not,” he said.

“I’ve never had sex,” she said.

“I should hope not,” he said. “You’re a child.”

“I’m nearly sixteen.”

“Leave it as long as you can,” he said. “At the end of the day, it’s nothing to get worked up about.”

“O.K.,” she said.

“And it tends to confuse situations.”

“Confuse how?”

“There’s a kind of unreal glow from it,” he said.

“A glow?”

“Yes,” he said. “And this may be a very negative view, but it’s what I believe—the glow of romantic love only lasts for about thirty . . . encounters.”

“You mean fucks?” the girl said.

“Yes,” he said. “You’ve an awful tongue in your head.”

“Thank you,” she said. “But how do you know thirty?”

“I’ve counted,” he said.

“And what happens after the glow?”

“After the glow,” he said, “it’s all just box sets and nonsense.”

“Box sets!” she said. “My ‘folks’ have some of those.”

“You’re unstoppable,” he said. “But do you know, by the way, what profanity is?”

“I’ve a feeling you’re going to tell me, Dad.”

“Profanity is a defensive use of language,” he said. “It’s a shield. So what are you defending yourself against?”

“What have you got?” she said.

•

What he’d got was too much love in his heart and too much love even yet to deliver. His capacities were in this way overburdened, he told the girl. An excess of feeling was the most terrible curse. He had sold himself to emotion young and never found the receipt. He was essentially in a type of eternal adolescence. He was susceptible to a heated glance across the room—even still—and to the potency of cheap music. The world was full of these enticements if you knew where to look for them. He was too old for all of it now, he said, and please don’t protest the fact. He wondered if he had not in some fundamental ways laid waste to his life. He was not a serious man, he said. And yes sometimes it all became very bleak, especially in the small hours, and sometimes, in truth, he could only see one way out.

“Suicide!” the girl sang.

“It’s not like it’s never crossed my mind,” he said. “But I don’t know. . . . There’s a kind of showiness about it that I would ultimately find gaudy.”

“Know what you’re saying,” the girl agreed.

“And generally speaking,” he said, “we must turn our eyes from death.”

“Yes, Father,” she said.

“It’s the sort of thing you’ll find will look after itself.”

“Got you,” she said. “So you just look away?”

“Until the last possible minute,” he said.

“O.K.,” she said. “But how will you tell that it’s the last possible minute? Or tell that it isn’t? I mean, could it even be right here, right now, on this fucking boat?”

He leaned forward a little and lowered his freckled patrician brow.

“You think you’re looking at the big fool who’s got all this figured out?”

•

Even with his hands still trembling in the Tesla that morning, even with Sylvia still raging among the bushes and the wildflower embankment, even with the guards still parked across the road and the squad car full to bursting with their broad unsalted-butter faces, even with all that going on he had decided to pay the little extra for a cabin with a sea view. He booked it on his phone and in fact the last-minute pricing wasn’t so bad.

The ferry moved through the black murk of the night now and he lay unsleeping with the soft groans and the sawing of the sea. He turned on a lamp and picked up some literature and read that the ferry at capacity carried some fourteen hundred souls. They lay sleeping in the sardine-tin cabins all around and above and below him, their dreams echoing in the low drone of the air system. He turned off the light again and lay back with his eyes open. He knew that there was nothing good coming, and this was a tremendous relief. Unseen across the sea—miles yet but ever closer—the white and green cliff tops of Finistère were waiting.

•

Before they had parted at Le Café there was a last exchange of unusual candor. She told him that the recent meds had fucked up her sex drive and now if she was attracted to anything it was to duvets. He told her that once when he was about her age his sense of himself had got so loose and wild that his mother and father had to tie him down to the bed at home in Rooskey, County Roscommon, and with every justification.

“And look at me now,” he said.

•

He saw her once more in the morning. She passed along behind her parents as the passengers trailed down to the car decks. The parents both had the harried manner of long sufferance and both wore fleece jackets as matchers against their suffering. The girl turned to him as she passed by and screwed her eyes in to meet her nose and shook out her arms for a couple of seconds in a mad trembling as if electrified in a facility. He shrugged for her, What can you do? She gave a little wave back then and a smile that was almost shy and almost sweet.

He approached with a rippling heart the Tesla. He carried his broad shoulders square and proudly. There was a crackle of illicit energy from the big man. There was something kinetic, something labile in his air. His lips moved softly with old emotions as the ferry docked and he sat waiting behind the wheel. He recited the names of all those he had loved—this was a familiar and settling routine and he was a good while at it. The gangways then descended with a great clanking and the cars began to roll.

France appeared first as a blinding whiteness made of the low September morning sun and he felt once more in his life that he had been rescued. He drove patiently and slowly through the yards of the port until the ferry’s traffic began to disperse, and the roads all opened up, and the morning, too.

He would drive fast now all day south and into the darkness and at the end of it there would be shellfish and cold white wine and the lovely cool dim of a single room, and maybe something just a little bit like sleep. ♦