Title: Freedom to Move
Author: Ayşegül Savaş

I was in Istanbul for a few days and on my way to visit my grandfather. He’d moved in with my father at the beginning of the pandemic because we had been worried about him living alone, in the town by the Black Sea where he’d retired. We’d urged him to come to the city, just for a short time. It had been a wise decision; my grandfather’s health deteriorated rapidly in those months, and his stay became indefinite. He could no longer go out for long walks as he used to, or even remain upright for extended periods.

My grandfather had always spent his days outdoors. Whenever he came to Istanbul, he’d take buses and ferries all over the city, sometimes going as far as the city’s gates. He travelled around the country with a tent. He stayed in mountain villages and invited himself to breakfast at the homes of locals. He loved that sort of thing—meeting strangers, seeing different lives. He often urged us, his grandchildren, to join him. He showed us pictures of the people he’d met on these trips, with whom he kept in touch. One time, when I was having breakfast with him at a seaside café in Istanbul, a boy of ten or eleven video-called to wish him a happy bayram.

“Come again soon, Grandpa,” the boy said.

My cousins and I all lived abroad, and we found it difficult to set aside time for such travels; our visits back home consisted of seeing many people in a short span. But we were proud of our grandfather—his youthful spirit and his sense of adventure. Perhaps we felt that it indicated something about us as well, something like a family identity.

Since my arrival, I had seen relatives and friends, and had also been to the Bosphorus, to Moda, and Cihangir—outings that had always signified a proper visit back, though I could no longer say that I enjoyed them. The neighborhoods changed rapidly between my trips, and they were so crowded. The city was packed beyond belief, filled with tourists—a thick stream of people moving slowly, engulfing everything. I felt resentment toward them, and I longed for the city where I’d grown up.

I had phoned my grandfather the night before to tell him I would visit the following afternoon. Had I called sooner, he would have asked me to come straightaway and planned meals together throughout my stay. My father was going to be out when I went over. He had a few things to do, he told me, and, besides, he preferred to spend time alone with me, rather than see me with my grandfather. This wasn’t very convenient, but I sensed that the living arrangement had begun to take its toll. It now seemed inconceivable that my grandfather would be able to go back to his small town. Of course, my father never mentioned any of this, but I gathered from phone conversations that he was out more and more. Later that afternoon, I would meet him for a coffee, before going to my mother’s for a dinner with my aunts. It was exhausting to be home, to feel torn between obligations because of our fractured family.

I’d just got into the taxi when my grandfather called to ask where I was.

“I’m on my way,” I told him, “but it will take me some time to get there.” I could picture his impatience. He must have got dressed hours ago. He would have been looking out the window, scouting for my arrival. He called again as the taxi was crossing the bridge. He’d forgotten to tell me that the downstairs buzzer didn’t always work, so I should press hard when I got there. Then he called a third time to say I should just phone as I was approaching.

“Granddad,” I said, a little flustered. “I’ll see you soon.”

At the door, I was greeted by the woman my father had hired to help around the house after my grandfather moved in. I’d met her once before, and it came back to me now that she was Georgian, though I couldn’t immediately remember her name.

“Grandfather is very impatient today,” she said. She spoke Turkish with a thick accent, emphasizing words in unexpected ways, but I found it remarkable that she already had such a command of the language.

I took off my shoes and coat, then went into the living room, where my grandfather was sitting in an armchair. He made a move to get up, but I motioned to him to stay put, and kissed his cheeks. He was terribly gaunt. Little flakes of dead skin stuck to his forehead. Still, he was wearing a three-piece suit and tie, doubtless for my sake.

“Look at you,” I said. “Look at this handsome gentleman.”

I sat across from him, recounting my first days in Istanbul, the people I’d seen so far. I told him that my mother had cooked an extraordinary dish of lamb on my arrival.

“She never comes to visit,” my grandfather said. “And she hasn’t invited me over since I moved here.”

I was glad my mother wasn’t there to hear this; I felt at once angered and saddened by my grandfather’s wish to be hosted by his former daughter-in-law.

“She’s working,” I told him. “She barely has a minute to herself.” I didn’t have the heart to explain that my mother had no desire to see my father’s family, let alone serve them.

Ketevan—I now recalled her name—was standing in the doorway and asked when we would like to eat.

I told her that I wasn’t very hungry. I’d just pour myself a cup of tea. If my grandfather wanted something, I could prepare him a tray. But, as I said this, I noticed that the dining table was set as if for a New Year’s meal, with a white tablecloth and red napkins, a vase of carnations.

“Of course you’re going to eat,” my grandfather said. “We’ll eat all together.”

Someone else had appeared behind Ketevan, a teen-age girl, maybe fifteen years old.

“Little Princess is here,” my grandfather said.

Although the table was set for four, Ketevan kept on repeating that she and Natela—her daughter—could eat in the kitchen.

“Please sit with us,” I told her. At the same time, I was annoyed that my grandfather had come up with such a plan, had made the woman cook and asked that we all eat together. Surely, I thought, the mother and daughter would rather be by themselves.

“I asked her to make you her specialties,” my grandfather said.

He motioned to me to help him get up, and we walked step by step to the table, his hand resting heavily on my arm. Again, I took in how frail he’d become, and I couldn’t quite believe it, as if his old self were concealed within this approximation of my grandfather. I had the irrational feeling that this was just a phase and that he would soon be restored to vitality.

It was awkward to be sitting at the table while Natela and Ketevan brought dishes, so I got up to help them. In the kitchen was a tray of golden buns; a salad of grated carrots and one of beets; a cake, decorated with sliced fruits.

“This is too much,” I told Ketevan. “You really shouldn’t have.”

She shook her head and smiled at me, then handed me a plate of food to carry.

Over lunch, I asked Natela questions, and her mother translated her answers. She’d arrived in Istanbul three months ago; she was now working at an office across the street. Already, she could understand much of what was said, but she was still shy about responding in Turkish.

“What do you do at the office?” I asked, and her mother told me that it was mostly cleaning and cooking. Natela was not as young as I’d guessed—she’d finished high school last summer.

“Do you like Istanbul?” I asked.

Natela shrugged. She said something to her mother. Then she told me, in English, “I like Taksim Square. But Mama doesn’t like it.”

“Your English is very good,” I said. I repeated the same in Turkish to Ketevan, who beamed with pride. She said that Taksim was an awful place; there was no knowing what sort of people hung out there.

Natela was wearing a tight black dress. There were stacks of bracelets on her wrists. Below her left elbow was a small tattoo in the shape of a bird. She was so young, I thought, and so impatient to mature. I could guess at her tilt toward desire, toward freedom.

The summer I graduated from high school, I was out around Taksim with my friends every day, returning home late at night. I’d been accepted by a prestigious university abroad, and I allowed myself every caprice, something my parents indulged. I felt sorry for Natela, that she had to sit around with us. She must find this all so boring.

“Why doesn’t she go now?” I suggested. “It’s still early, and she has the day off.”

“If you want to go,” Ketevan said, “you can go.”

Natela nuzzled her face against her mother’s arm.

“We made a cake,” she said.

I saw then that she was also still a child.

“Is our boy full?” Ketevan asked. She handed my grandfather another roll, then served him more of the colorful salads. “When your father is around, Grandfather’s diet is very strict. No dessert, no bread. Meat to feed a bird. But our boy loves to eat. Let him enjoy himself.”

“I guess so,” I said.

“After all,” she added, “what else does he have to look forward to?”

I was startled by her bluntness and quickly changed the subject, even though my grandfather didn’t seem to mind. Whenever I talked to him on the phone, I made sure to tell him that he would soon be strong enough to go out for walks, and that he should prepare to dance with me at a relative’s wedding in Ayvalık that summer.

My grandfather had started on his second plate and looked over to see if I was eating.

“Kezban is a great cook,” he said.

“Ketevan,” I corrected.

“Kezban’s my name for her. She’s Kezban, and Little Princess is Nihal.”

“Granddad, you can’t just make up names.”

“We don’t mind,” Ketevan said.

I told her that I’d been to Georgia once, a few years earlier, with my then boyfriend.

“Oh?”

“You have a beautiful country,” I said, knowing that this was a cliché. I was often told the same thing by people who’d visited Turkey, and then had to listen to a list of the obvious sights they’d seen. Still, I also named the places we’d travelled to—Tbilisi, Batumi, a day trip to Mtskheta.

“Very good,” Ketevan said. “A very good trip.”

“When was the last time you were home?”

She and Natela had been back a few months ago, she said, just as soon as the travel restrictions were lifted, though there were still firm measures in place. On top of this, my father had allowed her only a ten-day holiday, which meant that by the time they’d travelled there and spent a week in confinement the visit was almost over. They’d barely seen their relatives; on the one day they could go outside, they had managed to take flowers to Ketevan’s mother’s grave.

It occurred to me that I actually knew about this trip: my father hadn’t been able to find a replacement for Ketevan during her absence. He’d had to spend the whole time at home, helping my grandfather.

“Going off like that and leaving me in the middle of this,” he’d complained on the phone. “Your grandfather’s impossible. He’s literally looking for ways to get injured.”

My father was increasingly short-tempered with his father. He was aggrieved when my grandfather disobeyed the smallest rules—eating sweets, or not using both hands to steady himself when he got up from his armchair.

“Where did you stay when you went back?” I asked Ketevan.

“At our home,” she said. “With my husband and son.” She told me the name of a town, and though I nodded my head I’d never heard of it.

She and her husband had built this house, she explained, across from her in-laws, with whom they shared an orchard. Her own siblings used to live a short distance away. That life was gone now. There was no work for any of them. Her brother was in Spain, her sister in Azerbaijan. Her son was also trying to move, perhaps to join her and Natela in Istanbul. Her in-laws had passed away recently. But at least her husband still tended to the orchard. They had many fruit trees; they grew grapes.

She said something to Natela, nudging her.

From the kitchen, Natela brought a plastic bottle, wrapped in cellophane.

“My husband’s wine,” Ketevan announced. She took the bottle from her daughter and started to unwrap it.

“Oh, no,” I said, “you should drink that yourself. It’s so special.”

Ketevan continued unwrapping.

“I want to taste it,” my grandfather said.

“Granddad,” I said, “alcohol is terrible for you. Please don’t,” I told Ketevan. “Please don’t open it for us.”

“Today’s a special day,” Ketevan said.

“That’s so kind, but there’s no need,” I insisted.

“A special day for us,” Ketevan added. “It’s Natela’s name day.”

I felt foolish for having assumed that the wine was an offering to me and my grandfather. I was also embarrassed that they had to spend the day in our company, and had made so many preparations.

“Why didn’t you say so?” I said. It was still possible for Natela to leave, I repeated, and join her friends somewhere.

“Is a name day like a birthday? Do you have a party?”

“We celebrated this morning,” Natela said. “Mama made the buns for breakfast. We lit a candle and prayed. We phoned home when Grandfather was sleeping.”

Once again, I felt silly for thinking that all the food was in my honor. It seemed that my grandfather hadn’t known about the name day, either, and that Ketevan and Natela had wanted to mark it privately.

Ketevan brought out crystal glasses from the buffet behind the dining table. I remembered that my parents had bought these glasses during a holiday in Slovenia. They were among the many objects that had become the bitter focus of their separation. Perhaps that was why I’d never seen my father use them. My mother, too, mostly avoided the possessions that she’d victoriously laid claim to.

Ketevan filled our glasses, halfway for my grandfather. Natela brought out the cake.

“Excellent,” my grandfather said. “They have a very rich cuisine.”

“What’s the tradition?” I asked. “Do we sing a song?”

“We make toasts,” Ketevan said.

I raised my glass. “To Natela’s name day,” I said. “May all her dreams come true.”

The wine was sweet, and very strong.

Next, Ketevan raised her glass.

She spoke in Georgian, and Natela listened solemnly, her head bowed. Then, once again, she pressed her face against her mother’s arm.

“I toast to her future,” Ketevan said in Turkish. “Like you, I toast to her dreams. So that we may be together as a family, and we don’t have to dream of things far away.”

Of course, my toast had been a platitude, open-ended to accommodate any wish. Still, I might have imagined Natela dreaming of a future in Europe or America, one in which she would be travelling the world. At her age, I had wished only to be off, to be free, to start my life elsewhere.

Ketevan continued. “I toast that these times come to an end, and our countries can manage on their own. I toast,” she said, “that people don’t have to leave their homes.”

My grandfather had finished his cake and started nodding off at the table.

“Granddad,” I said, stroking his hand. “You’re falling asleep.”

“Big boy ate well,” Ketevan said. She put down her glass, still full. We helped my grandfather get up and walked him step by step to his armchair.

It was the end of the toasts. Natela started stacking the plates. She screwed the lid back on the bottle and carried the cake to the kitchen.

Once he was seated, my grandfather motioned to the remote control, mumbling that there was a show about to start.

My father had texted to ask what time we would meet.

“I’ll let you watch your show,” I told my grandfather, but he was adamant that I sit down with him. He called out to Ketevan, who was clearing the table, to make tea.

“It’s brewing,” she said, perhaps a little brusquely.

The show, like so many others, was about the intrigues of a large and wealthy family. Each time a new character appeared onscreen, my grandfather supplied background information about illegitimate children, blackmail, matriarchal ploys. It was difficult to keep track of the series of complicated relationships that he’d mastered; the whole thing seemed outrageously far-fetched. Still, I feigned interest.

Once the table was cleared and the tea served, Natela also came to watch.

“Do you like this show?” I asked.

She shrugged. “I don’t understand everything.”

“I don’t understand everything, either.” I smiled.

Every fifteen minutes, the show was interrupted by commercials.

“A single episode must take the whole day,” I told my grandfather.

“All the better for me,” he said. “At least it fills the time.”

I felt sad that he’d said this, and so openly. I thought I should’ve arranged some way to take him out, perhaps to sit by the Bosphorus or eat at a restaurant. Still, I had to leave soon to see my father before dinner. I was hoping that my grandfather would fall asleep and I could slip out, but he was now alert, watching even the commercials with interest.

“Granddad,” I said, putting my hand on his, “I should get going.”

“What’s the rush?”

I told him I was going to see my father.

“Why doesn’t he come home?”

“I think he had a meeting,” I mumbled.

“Very well,” my grandfather said.

“I’ll try to come again before I leave. But, if I can’t, remember that you have to prepare your dance moves for the wedding.”

“Very well,” my grandfather said again. “Say hello to your mother.”

I was taken aback by his curt farewell, as if his resignation were also a sign of his physical state, evidence of my altered grandfather.

“I’m going to try to visit once more,” I repeated. “I’ll let you know.”

I knelt down and kissed his cheeks. Then I kissed them again, and stroked the wisps of combed hair on his scalp.

During the commercial break, Natela had joined her mother in the kitchen and was sitting on a stool, chatting merrily, while Ketevan washed the stack of pans and trays. Natela sprang to her feet when she saw me at the door.

“I have to get going,” I said. “Thank you for an amazing lunch.”

Ketevan put aside a heavy casserole and wiped her hands on her apron.

“It’s still early,” she said. “Grandfather was so excited to see you.”

I felt anger toward her, and shame.

“It’s difficult to see everyone properly on such a short visit.”

Natela had fetched my coat and held it open for me to put on.

“Happy name day, Natela,” I said. “And thank your father for his delicious wine.”

As I was putting on my shoes, Ketevan asked if I could talk to my father: she wanted to go back home in the spring. She’d already asked my father two times, but he’d been very firm. She’d known from the beginning what the work entailed, he told her; she could take it or leave it.

She didn’t want to anger him, Ketevan said, but it was important for her to see her family.

“I haven’t asked him for a raise all year,” she said. “And Natela always helps out with Grandfather after work. He’s so happy when she’s around. She brings him joy.”

I was nodding the entire time that she spoke, even though I felt that I didn’t have any say in these matters. I told her that I would mention it to my father.

It was sunny outside, bustling with traffic, pedestrians, street sellers: the heart of the day. I walked toward Barbaros Boulevard, where I’d hail a cab. I’d more or less decided that I wasn’t going to mention Ketevan’s request to my father. No doubt it would only anger him once again, and I didn’t want to spoil our short time together. Anyway, I was in no position to defend the woman, to explain her wish to see her husband and son. I was leaving in a few days, free of responsibilities; I wasn’t the one overseeing my grandfather’s daily needs. Besides, I didn’t want my grandfather to be left with some stranger in the weeks that Ketevan and Natela would be gone; he was so comfortable in the mother and daughter’s company. Surely they could go back in the summer, when my grandfather travelled with us to the wedding.

I thought about writing to my cousins that evening on our WhatsApp group, to plan a trip following the wedding in Ayvalık. Our chat history consisted mostly of funny things we’d come across online, as well as childhood photos we unearthed during our visits back. I would suggest taking our grandfather to a hotel or a holiday rental. Granddad loved the sea, and he’d loved to swim. Barely two years ago, he’d gone swimming in the middle of autumn, proudly telling us how much good the cold water did the body and the mind. We could find a place on the coast, a house without stairs. He would sit and watch the sea. I had an image of all of us gathered around him on a terrace, pressing him for stories we hadn’t heard before or hadn’t paid attention to. For one thing, I thought, we should ask him about all the trips he had made around Turkey sleeping in a tent, and the strangers he’d met.

On Barbaros Boulevard, I stood with my hand raised, waiting for a cab. I tried to put aside the nagging feeling that my grandfather might not make it to the wedding.

Where are you? my father texted. Let me know if you’re still planning on meeting.

I ignored his tone of annoyance and wrote that I was on my way but I wouldn’t be able to stay for very long. ♦

This is drawn from “Long Distance.”