Title: Heart
Author: Shuang Xuetao

In 2013, I left my job at an advertising firm and started writing fiction. I wrote more than thirty short stories, a few of which were published in the local city journal, which was perpetually on the verge of folding. Then, on the sixth of November, 2015, my dad had a sudden heart attack, the result of a hereditary disease that had already claimed five or six people in my family, the first of them at the end of the Qing dynasty, my great-great-great-uncle, a superb woodworker who could make anything from a coffin to a comb. When he was fifty-five, his heart exploded and he died on a pile of lumber. It happened so abruptly, leaving him bleeding from every orifice, that his family thought he’d been poisoned. They cut him open, and discovered that his heart was full of tiny wood shavings, enough to build a foot-high pagoda.

Ever since then, my family has suffered from heart disease, about three in every ten of us, men and women, though it’s not as serious now that times have changed—none of us are woodworkers anymore, and surgery can save us. The procedure in question involves fitting a tiny engine into one of the heart’s chambers, to make up for the weakness caused by the organ’s abnormal fissures, and placing something like the filter of a water dispenser into the aorta, to prevent impurities from entering the heart. This operation wasn’t available in my city, L-------, at least not anywhere I trusted, mainly because of the difficulty of fitting the filter membrane, which in L------- would be placed by hand, with something like the muscle memory of a carpenter, unlike in Beijing or America, where robots were used. Our health insurance wouldn’t be accepted in America, so when my father had his attack I arranged for an ambulance to take us from the local hospital to Beijing.

We were due to set off around seven in the evening. By that time, my father’s face was purplish green and he could no longer speak, what with the oxygen mask on his face, and he lay on a gurney that was covered in some sort of blue plastic. A doctor from the E.R., a woman of about thirty, slightly plump, with dark-brown hair and rimless glasses, would accompany us. She said, I should warn you that it’ll take us eight hours to drive there, and it’s possible that your father will not make it. I said, I understand. She said, My name is Xu, and I’ve just graduated—this is my first time on the night ambulance to Beijing, and it’s such a serious case I’m a bit worried, so I hope we can work well together. Of course, I said. Definitely. She said, When I say work together, what I mean is that you do whatever I say—don’t get clever, don’t do anything unless I tell you to, don’t ask stupid questions. Sure, I said, I don’t have any questions anyway. She asked, Are you the only family member coming along? Yes, I said, is that O.K.? She said, There really ought to be one more person here. As a doctor I can push the gurney, but if the patient needs to be lifted one person will have to take his head and another his legs, and I’m not supposed to move him. I said, I can handle it myself. She said, I need to let you know, no pressure, but there was an incident where the family member dropped the patient and he died. I know you don’t want to hear this, but I’m obliged to tell you. I said, Understood. So you’re saying if we don’t work well together my father might fall and die. Cigarette? I don’t smoke, she said. Have your cigarette and then get on board—hopefully we’ll be able to drive through the night without stopping.

As we left the crowded E.R., some people scurried by, while others sat perfectly still, face in hands. A young woman ran in from the cold wearing pajamas, blood seeping from a gash between her eyes. A construction worker in a hard hat was carried past us by two of his colleagues. One of his legs was bent to the side like a faucet, and he was hopping along on the other. Outside, it was already completely dark. I was halfway through my cigarette when I noticed a cleaner eying the smoldering butt, so I stubbed it out and dropped it into his dustpan. As soon as I clambered aboard the ambulance, Dr. Xu said to the driver, Let’s go. We drove past the row of shops selling fruit and funeral goods by the hospital’s main entrance, then turned onto the highway. There wasn’t much traffic, and the driver kept up a steady pace. He was in green scrubs, with an extra-wide collar for his thick neck. All of a sudden, it came to me that I should slip him and the doctor a little money. This hadn’t occurred to me before, partly because this was such an urgent trip—I’d taken too long deciding whether to go ahead with it—and partly because I’d been spending so much time at home that I wasn’t used to being around other people. I scrabbled hopelessly through my rucksack, but, as I’d expected, I didn’t have much on me. Thinking about the deposit I’d have to put down when we got to Beijing, not to mention all the other expenses I’d need cash for, I felt a wave of despair.

As this was a hereditary disease, every member of my family had their own way of dealing with it: some were always popping pills, some kept getting themselves examined, some just did whatever the hell they wanted and were fine anyway, or fine until they kicked the bucket at forty or so, usually from alcohol poisoning rather than heart issues. My grandfather’s coping mechanism was boxing, a hobby he passed on to his three sons. Of the three, my father, the youngest, showed the least talent—he was born uncoördinated, with a long torso and short legs, unsuited to any sport. He moved slowly, too. Yet he was the one who persisted the longest, continuing to train without a break even when he was sent down to the countryside during the Cultural Revolution and then after he returned to the city. His trick was to train in secret—very few people outside the family knew that he could box. He woke up early to get in a couple of hours before work every day, and then did another round before bed. I couldn’t remember him ever skipping a session. He didn’t like talking and wasn’t close to anyone. When my grandfather was still around, he’d often say to my father, Hey, No. 3, you keep to yourself too much. That’s going to bite you in the ass when you get older. My father never answered him. Then my grandfather died and there was no one left to scold him. That’s the virtue of patience.

When I was a kid, I was always pestering my father to teach me a move or two. He said, What do you want to learn? I said, How to hit people, whack them so hard they fall right over. He said, I don’t know how to do that. I said, Then teach me how not to feel any pain when people hit me, and instead make their hands hurt. He said, I don’t know how to do that, either. It seems we have very different understandings of what boxing is, I don’t think we should talk about it anymore. That’s how he was, mostly silent, and when he did break his silence to say something he’d be very serious about it. I was only ten at the time, and even so he weighed every word, as if it had to be finely ground, worn down to a flavorless pulp.

Just before my university entrance exam I said to him, You practice boxing three hours a day, and I spend the same amount of time studying, probably more—do you think you’re better at boxing than I am at studying? He said, Do you think about studying when you’re not doing it? I said, No way, work is work and play is play, there has to be a line between them. He said, There you go. Even when I’m not boxing, I’m boxing in my heart, not just my heart, my flesh and bones, too. Sometimes I box in my sleep and wake up feeling exhausted, do you know what I mean? I said, So how can you prove you’re good at boxing? He thought about it and said, I can’t, but let me try a metaphor: Let’s say a cat falls from the fifth floor and doesn’t die—does the cat have anything to prove? I said, How do you know I’m not going to fall from the fifth floor one of these days? If boxing’s so great, why not teach me how to do it? He said, I can see I’d better not give you any more metaphors, you can’t cope with them. Why should I teach you? I said, Because I’m your son. He said, What kind of reason is that? Don’t think this or that has to happen just because you’re my son. I didn’t know who you were going to be before you were born. Losing my temper, I snapped, So go ahead and punch me. He said, You think you can get hit whenever you want, just like that? My fists aren’t for punching people. Go to bed.

My grandfather was eighty-five when he died in his sleep. One of my uncles died in the violence of the Cultural Revolution; the other was retired and living an unruffled life at home, though I hadn’t been in touch with him for a while. In the ambulance, my father’s foot twitched, and only now did it occur to me that I ought to remove his shoes. His feet were hideously swollen. He lay perfectly still, like a piece of driftwood, his heart rate and blood pressure gleaming on a monitor. Dr. Xu looked at his feet and prodded them one at a time with her index finger. I said, Is there a problem? She said, Why are your dad’s feet so small? I said, What? She said, Some people say that the size of your heart is proportional to the size of your feet, and though that’s nonsense, your dad really does have tiny feet. And there’s something else I don’t understand. Judging by my initial examination of your dad, his heart really shouldn’t still be working. Just look at his stats—they’re unimaginable. Heart rate twenty-five, blood pressure eighty over forty. To put it bluntly, he ought to be dead. I haven’t been doing this for very long, but even a thirty-year veteran wouldn’t have seen many cases like this. What kind of work do you do?

I said, Me? I don’t have a job. She said, Why don’t you have a job? I said, Because I don’t want to work. I’m really lazy—is that a kind of illness? She said, You don’t seem lazy—lazy people don’t usually get so anxious, nothing about you feels lazy to me. If you don’t have a job, what do you do? I said, I sit around at home. She said, What are you, a Buddhist? I said, No, sometimes I get bored and do some typing. She said, What kind of typing? Are you an author? I said, Yes, fiction, it’s childish but I like to write short stories. She said, If you’re sleepy, go ahead and have a nap. Your dad seems stable and I can keep an eye on him. I said, That’s really dutiful of you. I feel bad. After a pause, I said, in a small voice, I forgot to get money before we left. I’m sorry about that. She said, I’m not dutiful, it’s just that I’m new to the job and don’t get much say in anything. For the last half year they’ve stuck me with way too many overnight shifts. I couldn’t go to sleep now if I tried, and if I were tired I wouldn’t be able to stay awake no matter how much money you gave me. How come an author like you has such strange ideas?

Besides, she added, your dad has such an unusual condition, anyone working in medicine would want to observe him. Did you say it was hereditary? I said, Yes, a hereditary heart disease. She said, Who else in your family has it? I said, It basically skips a generation. My grandfather was fine, but my great-grandfather died of it. She said, Your great-grandfather must have been born around 1900. When did he die? I said, I think he was in his twenties, not long after my grandfather was born. She said, Was it a Chinese or a Western doctor who diagnosed him? I said, I don’t know, but he definitely died of heart disease. She said, How can you be so sure? I said, I’m his descendant, of course I know—this is our history. She didn’t respond, and I knew I’d taken the conversation in the wrong direction. I turned to the driver, but all I could see was the back of his neck and his collar. It didn’t seem like he’d heard any of our conversation. The ambulance kept going at a steady pace, with almost no braking or sudden turns, yet we’d overtaken a number of speeding vehicles. It was completely dark outside, nothing to see but the looming outlines of the surrounding hills. No honking, no radio. We were flowing through the night like the drip hanging above my father’s head, silently infiltrating his unfamiliar veins.

Over the next hour, I began to feel sleepy. If I’d been at home, I’d still have been wide awake—I often stayed up as late as two in the morning even when I had nothing particular to do, flipping through a book or writing a couple of paragraphs or shuffling through music. My father went to bed early and got up early, and never snored, though he did sometimes cough during the night. He was a paint sprayer at a factory and had chronic pharyngitis. He never woke himself up with his coughing. It was part of his sleep, like rolling over. He’d told me that he dreamed about boxing, but I didn’t know how true that was—he slept curled up, hugging his shoulders, taking up as little space as possible, as if the bed were full of other people hemming him in. In the summer, his blanket ended up between his legs, and he always wore a yellowing tank top rather than going shirtless. In the winter, he kept the covers pulled up to his neck, but even then I could see from the outline of his body that he was in the same shrunken posture.

I drifted off for what must have been ten minutes or so before jolting awake, assaulted by guilt—what if he’d died in those ten minutes? This brief nap seemed to have lasted years, as if I’d been out so long the entire world had transformed. Dr. Xu was studying my father’s hands, first from where she was sitting, opposite me, and then moving closer and squatting next to him. I said, What’s wrong? She said, Does your father play the piano? I said, No, he’s a laborer. She said, Look, his fingers are moving. I knelt by the gurney. His left hand was anchored in place by the drip tube and remained motionless. On his right index finger was a clip connected to the display screen, and as I watched he pushed the clip off with his thumb, then all five fingers thrummed on the edge of the mattress, over and over, never pausing in their tap-tapping, from his little finger to his thumb, maybe a dozen times before he tried unsuccessfully to replace the clip.

Dr. Xu glanced at the monitor. His heart rate is still falling at the same speed, she said. What’s going on? I said, I don’t know. She waited a moment, made sure his hand wasn’t going to start moving again, put the clip back on, and sat back down, still mumbling What’s going on? to herself. I said, My father’s boxed ever since he was a kid. She said, What kind of boxing? I said, No idea, but it’s always the same style of boxing. He’ll practice for a few hours at a time, always the same moves, once in the morning and once at night. She said, In a park? I said, No, in his bedroom. She said, Martial arts in a bedroom? I said, Yes, summer and winter alike. She said, Right, so this must be a nerve spasm or muscle memory—it’s not uncommon. Remember, your father is dying, his heart is weakening, and I’m not sure we’ll make it to Beijing. I said, But his fingers were moving so steadily. She said, That doesn’t matter, sometimes our bodies do that as camouflage, you should prepare yourself. I said, If it happens like you say, what should we do? She said, Drive straight back. He’s probably no longer in pain. How should I put this? It’s like a balloon slowly deflating, that’s about the same thing. I said, That comparison causes me pain. She said, Your pain and his pain are two different things. I said, Yes, though you can’t do anything about either. I regretted the words as soon as they were out of my mouth, because why would I expect her to be able to do anything? She was only an emergency-room doctor, a stranger who was in this vehicle for god knows what reason. I said, I apologize, that’s not your responsibility. She reached out to lift my father’s blanket and said, No need to apologize—everything you said is true. Give me a hand, he needs a new pee pad.

We drove on awhile longer. I glanced out the window, and noticed that the traffic was growing sparser. We’d probably crossed into Hebei Province, and it must have been roughly three in the morning. For the past hour, I’d been pondering my father’s funeral. They were a real headache, the countless tasks that lay ahead: contacting relatives I hadn’t spoken to in ages, getting their phone numbers from a palm-size book my father kept by his bedside. He’d retired from a state-run factory only to get another job spraying paint for a private firm, which he’d done right up until he fell ill, and so I probably ought to reach out to his co-workers; they’d usually be the ones to chip in for his funeral expenses and send a few vehicles for the procession. I imagined myself sitting in an office in that struggling little factory, discussing these things with some indifferent middle-aged man, feeling even more stressed than I was at this moment. All of this I would have to navigate on my own, whereas on this night I at least had two other people with me, and my father could take on his share of the responsibility, because no matter what condition he was in he was still participating in my life, and, burdensome as this was, when he died there would only be me left in my life, totally alone. I guess that’s what freedom looks like nowadays, but when that happened would I still need to write? My father had never expressed any opinions about my writing, in fact he hadn’t read a single word of my stories, but, even so, had I been writing for his sake? If not, why was I so doubtful now?

I told myself that of course I had to keep writing—I wasn’t doing it for him, he didn’t know anything, I was writing for everyone in the world except him—but these conclusions just rattled around inside my head, like echoes from someone shouting into a deserted valley.

Around three-thirty in the morning, Dr. Xu said, I’m starting to feel a bit sleepy. I said, Shut your eyes for a while, then. She said, I’ll nap for half an hour. Keep an eye on the drip and his heart rate, and wake me if anything seems irregular. I said, All right. She lay down on her seat, using her arm as a pillow, and dropped off straightaway, her head and feet pointing in the same direction as my father’s. Four o’clock came and she slept on, but I didn’t wake her, because my father’s vitals showed no sign of changing; they weren’t plummeting as she’d predicted. I didn’t feel tired at all, though my ass hurt from sitting still for so long and I had to wiggle it around. Then all of a sudden I needed to pee; the urge came out of nowhere, like someone pulling a sink plug. I said to the driver in a low voice, Hey, I need to pee, is there a rest area coming up? He didn’t answer and kept facing the road. I didn’t think I could hold it much longer, so I scuttled to the front and said, Sir, sorry to bother you, but I need to use the bathroom. Still, he said nothing, as if he found my request so ridiculous that merely replying would wound his dignity. I tapped his shoulder and said, Sir, I’m about to piss myself, could you stop? That was when I looked in the rearview mirror and saw that his eyes were shut. Startled, I thought, Wait, I must be mistaken—does he just have small eyes? I leaned forward and, no, he was fast asleep, breathing evenly, in through the nose and out through the mouth, even snoring lightly, every muscle in his face relaxed, a faint sheen of grease shining in the street lights, his hands still on the wheel. There was a slight bend in the road up ahead, and without hesitation he guided the vehicle around it, stepping on the accelerator and the clutch as needed. I grabbed his shoulder and shook him, but he didn’t wake up. Next I pinched the back of his neck, but again, nothing. He just jolted as if a needle had pierced his bum, rising a little from his seat before settling back down. We were going about ninety miles per hour, and I couldn’t stir him.

My bladder felt like an unruly schoolchild waiting for the final bell. I walked back to my father’s side, lifted his blanket, and pulled the pee pad out from under him. It was still perfectly dry, just a bit warm. I glanced at Dr. Xu, but she was sound asleep, so I pulled down my trousers and let rip. The liquid was quickly absorbed, even though I had so much to let out that by the time I was done the pad looked like a cotton-filled quilt and was much heavier than before. I stuffed it back under my father, his withered legs with a red birthmark on the right thigh. I’d known this was there when I was a kid, but I’d forgotten about it till now. After tucking myself back into my trousers, I tapped Dr. Xu and said, Hey, wake up! The driver’s asleep, we need to do something. She didn’t move, so I grabbed her arm and pulled it out from under her head. She fell from her seat, but remained asleep. I checked her breathing and she was still alive, only her face looked more anxious than before; her brow was furrowed, and she let out occasional sighs, her head bumping against the floor of the ambulance. I bundled her back onto the bench and she suddenly asked, How much longer? I said, I don’t know. She said, Give me a bit more time, I’m almost done. Then, silence.

I sat back down. There were no other vehicles in sight, just the rising night fog, a sort of milky-white haze in all directions. We must have been approaching Beijing. Now I realized that as well as forgetting to get cash I’d also neglected to bring any reading material. At this point I desperately needed a book to whisk me away from this place. Even an out-of-date literary journal would have done the job. I tried hard to remember something I’d read recently. A poem popped into my mind, or rather half a poem; I couldn’t remember the poet, but a writer friend of mine had posted it online:

There was more, but I’d forgotten it. Grandma and soup. Nourishing images, which was probably why it had come to me: I needed comforting thoughts at this moment to show me that human connection actually existed in this world, something that gave off heat, a scene with a little noise and bustle, anything to dispel my current sinking perplexity. Dr. Xu’s face knocked against the back of her seat from time to time, until I rested my rucksack under it, nice and soft since all I’d brought was a jacket and two packets of tissues. The driver continued expertly piloting the vehicle, and I could only assume that he was keeping tabs on the road ahead and the rearview mirror with his ears.

Once, when I was little, my father and I spoke about death. I’d asked him, Today Big Fatty said he was going to beat me to death—can he do that? My father said, If he wants to, he can. He was rinsing vegetables at the time—he could cook a few simple dishes, but refused to touch potatoes or radishes, because when he got sent down to the countryside that was all he had to eat and they wrecked his stomach. Nowadays when he saw them at the vegetable market he’d walk quickly by. I said, Then what happens after I’m dead? Can I get revenge? He said, No, you’d be completely defeated. I said, Are you going to die? He said, Yes, I might die at any moment. The human body has a heart in it, about the size of your fist, and when it stops beating you die. I said, Why would it stop? It’s beating now, it will beat tomorrow—why would it stop one day? He said, It’s beating now, but it might not tomorrow, though your heart is very healthy—you aren’t going to die because of that. I said, How would you know? He said, I listened to it when you were born. I heard your heart and it’s a healthy one. Besides, my heart has problems, so the probability is that yours doesn’t—those are reasonable odds. Anyway let’s leave it at that. The next time Big Fatty wants to hit you, you should run away as fast as you can, then you won’t die.

Dr. Xu rolled over but nimbly avoided falling off the bench. I shut my eyes, too. Now everyone in the ambulance had their eyes shut, and we entered a common darkness. All of a sudden, I heard coughing. First I thought it must be the driver, but I quickly realized that it sounded too familiar to be him, like someone crumpling sandpaper. I opened my eyes to see my father hacking away, more and more violently. Finally, he woke himself up. I said, Dad. He looked at me and sat up. As always, now that he was awake, the coughing stopped. He said, What’s all this? I said, We’re almost in Beijing. He said, Beijing? What for? I said, To get you treatment, you had a heart attack. He said, Forget it, I saw my own heart a moment ago, it’s been gnawed at by worms, it’s all rusty now. A worm had a chat with me, it said it knew my grandfather. Are you going to Beijing, too? I said, Yes, who else would take care of you? He said, What nonsense. I don’t need to be taken care of. What’s the time? I said, Five-twenty in the morning. He said, I haven’t boxed yet today. Help me get rid of this pee pad, it smells revolting.

With that, he crawled out from under the blanket and stood there, boxing. After twenty minutes, he sat down and said, I’ve forgotten what comes next. I said, How’s that possible? You’ve been practicing this sequence for forty years. He said, It’s gone, I don’t remember a single bit of it. My whole life has gone past, just like that. I said, It’s not over yet, you’re doing perfectly well now, aren’t you? He said, My whole life has gone past. I always knew it would, I knew my life would slip by, that’s why I took up boxing, because what else could I do? And now that I’ve forgotten the boxing, too, I feel light. I’ve finally gotten through it, I’ve spent it all. I said, Would you like some water? He said, I’m not thirsty. What are your plans? I said, I don’t know, I’m still not able to accept a life that doesn’t have you in it, please hold on awhile longer. He said, You think too highly of my existence. The probability is that your life has more meaning, your existence devours mine. From the day you were born you’ve been eating my existence bit by bit with a little spoon, but that doesn’t matter, you don’t need to feel guilty. When do you plan to get married? I said, I haven’t given it any thought. He said, Mmm, well, when you have a son, you’ll eat him with a spoon, too, that’s how good your appetite is. Like I said, I listened to your heart when you weren’t looking—it’s sturdy as an airplane engine. You can’t hear it but I can, it roars by my side every single day. That’s why I’m quiet.

And then he actually did fall silent for a while, the way he often did, stopping in the middle of a conversation. Who knows what he was thinking? Maybe he’d just forgotten what he was about to say. Dr. Xu rolled over again, this time with her face toward us. Her eyes were open, but I wasn’t sure if she could see us. What you’re saying isn’t any help to me, she said with absolute certainty, no help at all. There’s nothing else I can do—it’s perfectly clear in the images, and every instrument tells me the truth, so there’s no point to your lying. History doesn’t lie. History has proved that people like you are no help. Give me your medical records. She rapped lightly at her head, eyes half shut. Who wrote this? What kind of handwriting is this? No one could read this!

My father didn’t respond. His face was full of incomprehension. He had no idea what she was getting at, or why there would be such a patient in the ambulance. Her entire body juddered, as if someone had kicked her, and her eyes drifted shut again.

Give me a hand, my father said, I’m heading back. As I lifted him onto the gurney, he wrapped his arms around me. He didn’t stink, but rather had the light pleasant scent of a small child. Into my ear he said, Goodbye, this is as far as we’ll go. I said, No, don’t say that, you’re not old yet—you have to wait till you’re an old man. He said again, Goodbye. As his eyes lost focus, I said, Don’t fall asleep, we’re almost there. His eyes widened a little and he said, Who are you? I said, I’m your son. He nodded and said, Safe travels, take care. With that, he lay flat, reaching out to cover himself with the blanket. He fell asleep, coughed a couple of times, and stopped breathing.

The monitor began beeping, waking Dr. Xu. She groped around, realized there was nothing next to her, then woke fully. She asked who’d put a rucksack under her head, and when I said I had, she said it was very uncomfortable. I told her two things had happened: the driver had been fast asleep for quite a while, and my father had died. I could tell she wanted to comfort me, but her professionalism held her back. She nodded and removed his drip as if she were unravelling a sweater back into yarn. After a few minutes, the driver woke, too, looking unabashed, but then nothing bad had happened, so fair enough. Besides, the nap had left him refreshed, as if his day were just beginning. He turned and spoke to Dr. Xu, and they decided we should go back the way we came. I asked Dr. Xu if we could stop, and we did at the next rest area, so I could go to the bathroom. When I got back, I made sure that the other two were still awake, then I curled up next to my father’s legs. I felt light, free of burdens, free of goals, and to the accompaniment of my own heartbeat I soon fell asleep. ♦

(Translated, from the Chinese, by Jeremy Tiang.)