Title: Maintenance, Hvidovre
Author: Olga Ravn

I’m talking about it now because my husband doesn’t believe me and our two other children don’t, either. None of them were there at the start.

I’d bled heavily and we’d been put under observation. I was sweating that colossal sweat which comes washing out of you postpartum, the sweat of childbirth.

I was all on my own in the room. It was so small and scribbly, like a cracked casing.

The child was sleeping in the cot. I’d fed her formula from a cup. My milk hadn’t come in yet. Apart from the bleeding, the birth had gone well, but I couldn’t sleep.

Through the window I could see a maze of low-cut hedges, and behind them in the semidarkness a hospital building identical to the one I was in.

No, there was no tone in me. There was no call. A gray and foggy light descended upon me. It was the early morning. I was thirsty. I remembered an old folktale in which a woman cuts off her breasts. Then I thought about Mutter Pappenheimer, a beggar woman in Germany, who had her breasts torn off with a pair of tongs in 1600. The hospital was still. The hospital gown was unfathomably long; it hung down between my legs. My strange, distant feet walked. The child lay like a shadow in the cot as I opened the door. The door made a sweeping sound. Farther along the corridor I could see another woman in a hospital gown like mine; she dragged her feet, too. She had messed-up hair and a wild, inward look in her eyes. She clutched her phone.

It hurt to walk, but it wasn’t as if I’d never been there before. I could feel how the warm blood slid out of me like liquid from a test tube. In the patients’ kitchen I gulped from the juice carton.

“That’s my juice.” It was the woman from the corridor.

“No, actually it’s the whole ward’s juice,” I replied, and gulped some more.

She studied me.

“Did you see my kid?” she asked.

“No, I don’t think so,” I answered. “Is he asleep?”

“I think so.”

I nodded and wiped my mouth on my sleeve. Out in the corridor under the strip lighting a second woman in a hospital gown, bandy-legged after giving birth, came slowly toward us. Her face was completely blank.

“Did you see my kid?” she asked, staring, and opened her mouth strangely, as if she were about to be swabbed.

I smiled. I felt an afterpain, and bled again. The sanitary towel grew thick between my legs, like a pair of rolled-up tennis socks.

“Did you see her?” she asked again.

I backed into my room and closed the door cautiously. There was a dusklike murk, silence. The child’s fragrance filled the room. I went over to her cot. We’d brought our own duvet and a little baby hat, but they say baby hats aren’t necessary, that’s only in movies. The cot was empty. I snatched up the duvet; it was still warm, but there was no child.

I ran out into the corridor. My stitches pulled.

“My baby’s gone!” I yelled.

A sleepy nurse was eating sponge cake in the duty room. She turned toward me, unalarmed.

“She was lying in her cot only a moment ago!” I said.

“Let’s go and have a look, shall we?” She got to her feet, brushed some crumbs from her uniform.

“Come on,” she said, and took my arm. “You look pale. Have you remembered your liquids?”

“I drank some juice,” I said, and let myself be led.

In the corridor, three women in hospital gowns wandered, bandy-legged.

“Are they always up at this time, the women?” I asked.

“Yes, it can be quite lively between three and four,” the nurse said. The uniform gave her a uniboob, and she wore a badge with a four-leaf clover in red and gold.

Stepping into the room, I broke out in a sweat again, shaking.

“You see, he was here all along,” the nurse said, and lifted the child from the cot. She had her by the armpits, as if she’d just pulled her out of a birth canal.

“She looks different,” I said.

“He’s fine.”

“It’s a girl,” I said.

“No, I think not,” she replied, and undid the nappy so that I could see my daughter’s penis and scrotum.

“I’ve already got two boys,” I said.

“You’ll have your hands full,” she said, now on her way out. “Use the call bell if you need anything. Try to get some sleep. And don’t forget your liquids.”

The room was blue. Yet the long white curtains seemed to glow with a sinister light, like two cylinders of glass filled with bleach. Gradually, the morning emerged outside the window. It was May. Birds began to sing, so I knew it was around 4 a.m. The child stirred, sniffing the room like a small animal. She’d soaked her diaper and as I changed her I tried to avoid looking at her strange little girl-penis.

“There’s a nub, you see,” the midwife had said during the ultrasound scan when I was pregnant with my first son. I put the baby to my breast. My milk still hadn’t come in. She sucked eagerly, a few drops of colostrum. It hurt. It was a dry pain. Like sex when you’re not wet. She fell asleep at the breast and I sat with her like that. The white curtains poured more and more of their bleach onto us. Outside, the trimmed hedges looked like a stupid poster. Once she was sleeping soundly enough I put her back in the cot. As I straightened up, the blood ran again; I felt it trickle down my leg. With some difficulty I cleaned myself up, using the handheld showerhead, and changed my sanitary towel. My hospital clothes were stained. I felt thirsty again.

In the kitchen I drained the carton of juice in a single gulp. A woman appeared in the doorway.

“Did you see my kid?”

“No, I told you,” I said.

She went back out into the corridor. I went after her.

Now I counted four women in hospital clothes, all with the same ponderous postnatal gait.

I didn’t want to go in and see to my child. The strangeness of what the diaper hid frightened me. I decided I’d go along to the duty room and say hi. With meticulous steps I approached. But there was no one there. I looked back down the corridor. It was quite a way to my room. Then the door opener buzzed at the entrance to the ward. I turned to see the door sweep open and one of the messy-haired women pass through it as if in slow motion.

“Hey!” I said. “You’re not supposed to go out!”

I set off after her. I wanted to catch up with her. As I reached the door, another woman in a hospital gown appeared, bewildered-looking.

“Did you see where she went?” I asked.

She shook her head.

“She’s not allowed out there—we must go after her.”

She came with me.

We were in a big corridor now. There was no one else around. But we could see her in the distance. At strange zombie speed, with strange zombie steps, we went in pursuit. I could feel myself bleeding again. I was thirsty. There was such a strange light. The light of windowless hospital corridors.

When I was taken upstairs from the delivery room back to my own room, the porter had told me that I’d given birth in a part of the hospital that was built during the Cold War. I hadn’t known that I’d given birth underground. But there were several floors down there that had been constructed to withstand a nuclear blast.

The woman we were chasing threw open a door and went through it. We kept going after her. My sidekick groaned softly. We entered another long corridor. It, too, was empty, though narrow and winding. The paint was flaking off the walls like skin. We came to another door, this one held ajar by a bucket. My fellow-pursuer slipped through the crack, and I followed, taking the bucket with me so that the door could close. We were out among the weird shrubs now. The messy-haired woman was still ahead of us. Between the low hedges I saw several other women, bandy-legged, in the same hospital gowns, their laborious way of walking revealing that they, too, had just given birth. We followed.

We came to a tall gable end of the hospital where the others had gathered. The bucket was heavy and the thin metal handle dug into my fingers. I realized now that the bucket was filled with a dull, white liquid, and I put it down. Other buckets also containing milk of lime had been put down all around us. The other women had already started, so we picked up brushes, some of which had long handles, others short, and began whitewashing the wall.

The gable end we were working on was enormous, with a single window high up the wall. Scrupulously we worked, the milk of lime splashing our faces. We bent over our buckets and huffed. Blood ran down our legs, soaking our saggy hospital socks and mingling with the white liquid on the ground. The red and the white couldn’t agree, wouldn’t mix, but wove together in long marbly rivulets. A strange fog came down around the gable end, whose maintenance was our responsibility.

The work made me dizzy. More than once I staggered, wiped the sweat from my brow. I fell, and was covered in the slimy milk of lime and blood. My face got wet.

One of the others reached out to help.

“Did you see my kid?” It was the woman from the kitchen.

All of a sudden I thought about my husband at home, the boys. I saw in my mind the unholy mess of their untidied rooms. A monstrous clutter of primary colors.

“Come with me,” I said, grasping the woman’s hand. I was tired. The alkaline milk of lime stung my skin. It occurred to me that whatever I did I mustn’t lick my lips. We went back to the maternity ward without speaking. I showed her into my room.

“Here he is,” I said, rolling the cot forward.

She was so remarkably clean. Not a single splash on her, of lime or blood. The child in the cot opened its dark eyes and looked at us. The woman picked him up and kissed him softly.

“He’s lovely, but he’s not mine. Mine’s a girl.”

“Mine, too,” I said.

We looked at the boy. He sneezed.

Smiling, the woman placed him in the dirty-laundry bag.

We sat down. She on the bed. Me on a chair.

Time passed. Sunlight spilled in. We were waiting for him to start crying. It struck me that his skin required lotion. That he was surely dry on the outside, and inside, too.

The door opened and a porter came in. He emptied the waste bin, gathered up the laundry bag, and took it away.

The woman beamed from the bed.

“I’m very tired,” I said. We fell asleep.

“You’ve lost a lot more blood than we’re happy with,” the doctor said, but released us nevertheless. The corridor was empty as we left. My husband drove the car. When we got to the house, I went straight upstairs for something to drink. The kitchen looked unchanged. My husband came in, carrying the child in the car seat, and I looked at him in fright. But he hadn’t noticed anything, he didn’t know the child and couldn’t see it was the wrong one.

There was a strange sound, a gasp as I searched myself for the right feeling, but it was like clutching running water, and I realized then that I was laughing.

Every year, when May comes around, I wake up at about 4 a.m., confused by the light of the sky, as if the spring night concealed a day. The trees blossom in the street and I look at them through the window. I am an implement, a sweeping brush, who remembers the other child. It’s like happiness. ♦

(Translated, from the Danish, by Martin Aitken.)