Title: Minority Report
Author: Mary Gaitskill

I am now well over fifty years old. I am alone, but I have had relationships, including a common-law marriage that just recently ended. I dreamed of him, the man from long ago, through all my previous relationships. These dreams of him—and thoughts, I have also had thoughts and memories triggered by things as random as a singer’s voice or the subplot of a TV show or a movie or even a cartoon—are like a weather system passing across the distant horizon of my outermost self, but they affect the local barometric pressure and the color of the shared sky.

I was his employee for about two months. It was my first job; I hadn’t yet turned eighteen. I had looked forward to graduating from high school, but then all I did was eat lunch with my mom and lie around and watch “The Four O’Clock Movie.” At five, my father would come home from work with my sister, Donna. She didn’t have a car, so she had to wait for him at her job, at a state home for retarded kids, and if he saw her talking with any weird-looking “inmates” he would make fun of them in the car and she would be so mad that when they got home she would storm up the stairs and slam her door. After dinner, sometimes she and I would go for a walk and smoke pot she’d bought from somebody at the state home, and she’d talk about how mad she was, and how she wanted to get a different job, working with animals. But she liked the retarded kids, some of whom were not even retarded—they were just poor and crippled and had weird parents who’d kept them locked in a room with a television for years, until social workers found them and stuck them in the state home. There were actually two kids like that, and one of them was old enough for her to have interesting conversations with. Nobody thought he ought to be there, but nobody could get him out. Donna said that if she got another job she would still go and visit him. But she never got another job.

It sounds bad, making fun of retarded people when you aren’t even supposed to say the word now—like “developmentally disabled” is any better? But my father did not disrespect those people, and he never would’ve even pretended to make fun of a kid like that except in the car with Donna. Because he wanted her to do something besides frown and mumble “I don’t know”; he wanted her to yell and show some feeling.

When my parents decided that I should go to community college to learn secretarial skills, my mother asked me if I wanted to get a liberal-arts degree, too. I said, “Why?,” and she said, “To expand your horizons. To become a better secretary. Or you might even decide to do something else!” I didn’t answer her and she didn’t press me to, because that’s how we were. Silently, I absorbed her words; they were embarrassing to me, even painful, but at the same time powerful and beckoning: Expand your horizons. Something else. Just hearing her say this made it feel almost like it had already happened and I didn’t have to do anything.

But I did have to do something. I enrolled in an accelerated secretarial class for the summer. I looked through the class catalogue and thought about poetry and history. But it seemed like enough just to try the secretarial classes at first, to get used to college. Besides, we had only one car and I didn’t want to create a schedule that would cause too much stress. In the fall, I took two English classes and I got A’s in both of them. The teacher was a good-natured man with a red, rumpled forehead, small friendly eyes, and a joyful smile. He wrote on one paper that I had “good insight” and “a way with words.”

•

After Christmas, I looked for a job. The ads in the newspaper were for low-paying jobs, like file clerk or telephone solicitor or receptionist. My mother drove me to interviews for maybe a week before I found a secretarial position that didn’t require experience, working for a lawyer in Westland named Ned Johnson. The office was in a small house, brick, with stiff fir trees on either side of the door and a flower box under the window. My mother waited in the car while I went to the door. Ned Johnson was there by himself. Given that he would wander my dream-mind for decades, I don’t know why my memory of our first meeting is so vague, obscured by disconnected feelings that move like clouds or greasy smoke across the receding moment. He was a short, thick-bodied man with deep, shining, active eyes. I was startled by him without knowing why.

During the interview, I said weird things I wouldn’t normally say. He told me that the job was dull, and I said, “I like dull work.” He stared as if he were insulted, and I thought the interview was over—but instead he said something weird. He said, “There’s something off about you. You’re closed and tight, like a wall.” And I just said, “I know.”

When my mother asked how the interview went, I said, “I don’t think he liked me.” But the next day a girl called and told me he wanted to hire me. She said I could start tomorrow if it was convenient. My parents were really happy. I remember my father smiling, holding a can of beer and some peanuts; there was something special for dessert.

The people who came into the office were odds and ends in human form: a man with a scar on his face who was suing his neighbors because their dog barked “all goddam day,” a middle-aged Black woman in mod teen clothes, an old Russian lady in a purple coat. The furniture, too, was comically mismatched, and there was too much of it for the low-ceilinged rectangular room: two cheap swollen couches faced each other before my grossly big oak desk, which itself pointlessly faced two haughty high-backed armchairs, positioned as if for an important meeting that never took place.

But I liked the strange furniture. It made the lawyer seem more human because it offset his extreme consistency, his choppy economical movements, his always shining eyes. His style of training was loud and cheerful, full of stressful encouragement. When I did something right, he would clap his hands and say, “She’s coming along!” If I made a mistake, he would say, “Slowly, slowly!” or “Just do the best you can!” It was the same voice he used to greet a client he liked, the old lady from Russia who wore the purple coat with a thick sash knotted around her crumpled waist. She was the only foreigner I had ever met and she was the only person the lawyer came out of his office to meet, instead of just buzzing me to send her in. When she was next on the list, he would open his door and say, “There’s my girlfriend!,” and she would rise and wobble toward him with fierce, caneless dignity. His attention to her made me trust him. Because there were clients that he did not like at all and he didn’t bother to hide it from me, saying things like “He is completely crazy” or “I feel sorry for her husband.” He was sincere in his likes and dislikes.

When Donna asked me how the job was, I said, “It’s O.K.” But I liked it more than that because it was so much better than school. At school, I’d had no friends, except for a girl named Sandy, and the only thing we had in common was that we both liked animals. I almost never talked, because I didn’t know how; I couldn’t understand the way other kids talked to one another. I felt afraid all the time. I was afraid of saying something wrong, and I was afraid of being mocked or bullied the way I had been in elementary school.

What was strange about this: I was good with words. I was in honors English and history because I could write papers. But I couldn’t make my ability with written words transfer to the bewildering clash of people talking, their faces and voices coloring their words with too many expressions to respond to. My skill in English was so useless that I despised it; even my parents didn’t care that much about it.

It wasn’t like that in the lawyer’s office. His voice and his face were like traffic signals; they always said some version of the same thing. I could not have explained what the thing was but it didn’t matter: I knew what I was supposed to do. He cared about my skills. I had said weird things and he had said them back, but it didn’t interfere with the rhythm of our time together. The things he said were no different from him telling me to type a letter or find a document.

•

It was a peaceful time. In the morning I would wake up before everybody else. I would have my tea and look out the window at the world: one brick house after the next, each, like the lawyer’s office, with the same flower box under the same square window. The lawns were all the same size and shape, and all the grass was thick and incredibly green because, my father said, it was sod. The sun came up huge and red, like an alien power transforming the uniform lines of our human homes and the grid of streets and sidewalks into something stark and strange. I would feel the quiet joy of anticipation, though I did not know what it was that I anticipated.

Then it started to go wrong. Ned Johnson came out of his office one day when there was no one waiting to see him. He put one of the letters I had typed on my desk. He yelled at me that there were typing mistakes in it. He said that I had been making a lot of mistakes and I was making him look like a fool. I apologized and said I hadn’t realized. He said, “You’re going to have to do better,” and I said, “I will, Mr. Johnson.” But instead I did worse: typing mistakes, misfiled correspondence, numbers taken down wrong; I answered the phone “like a machine”—he shouted that at me in front of the old Russian lady. She looked the other way.

When I told Donna, she said, “I hope he doesn’t fire you.” I called Sandy. Her family had moved to Kalamazoo right after graduation and I hadn’t spoken to her for months, but I didn’t have anybody else to call. She said, “I don’t think he’s going to fire you. He sounds like he just likes to bitch.” She said that her boss at 7-Eleven bitched and yelled and even threw things and you just had to wait for him to calm down. We talked about her rabbit; he had some kind of infection on his leg and she was worried.

Neither Donna nor Sandy said that I should quit. That didn’t occur to me, either.

For a few days I didn’t do anything wrong, and the lawyer brought in a box of Amy Joy strawberry frosted doughnuts and left them on my desk. He spoke to me in a personal way. He told me he sensed that I was a deeply good person but “complex.” I was so surprised that my head turned sideways, and I felt an embarrassed smile cross my face. He said, “You just close the door and act like there’s nobody home. How do you expect to do a good job like that?”

My head went back to normal. “I don’t know,” I said.

“Why don’t you talk more? Why don’t you open up?”

Nobody had ever said anything like that to me before. His body was relaxed, his face alert and scenting, the way an animal scents pheromones in the air with its open mouth.

I told him the truth. “I’m afraid,” I said. “When I see a strong personality, I don’t know how to deal with it. So I step back.”

He smiled. “You shouldn’t be so shy.”

If I’d told Donna about this conversation she would have said, “What an asshole.” I didn’t want to tell her. I didn’t even want to tell Sandy. His words were so clear and plain. They felt private, and I guarded them as I would any private thing. The way my head had turned to the side when he told me I was a good person—it was like he’d touched my face and gently pushed it. The expression “turning somebody’s head” was real. I was astonished by that.

But the next day he was angry again. He said that I was the dumbest typist he’d ever met. Either that or I was lazy or I was making mistakes on purpose. “Is that it?” he shouted. “Are you trying to provoke me? Why would you do something like that?” I sat and stared at the letter he had thrust under my nose. I tried to say, “Maybe I should leave,” but no words came. “What’s wrong with you?” he yelled.

He told me to come into his office. It was the middle of the day, but no one was there. Still, he closed the door behind us. He told me to put the letter on the desk. Then he told me to bend over the desk so that my face was very close to the letter. I didn’t understand but I did it. He told me to read the letter out loud. I did. He started spanking me, hard. It didn’t hurt at first, because of my skirt. But he did it for a long time. I read the letter until I cried. My body jerked with each blow. He kept doing it.

Now women are exposing men for doing things like this—even for doing things that, to me, look very normal compared with this. They say that a man kissed them when they did not want to be kissed, or touched their knee, or rubbed their back. I have read accounts in which the women say that they did not tell the men to stop, because they felt “frozen.” Donna is very sarcastic about these women, who seem mostly to live in New York or Hollywood. My friends at the credit union, where I’ve worked for the past couple of years, feel the same, that those women—or girls, as we call them—are weak and spoiled and don’t know how to handle men. I’ve never argued. But I have different feelings. Because I still don’t know why I did what the lawyer said, or why I didn’t stand up and leave, or why I went back the next day.

When I finally winced, he stopped striking me. I dropped my forehead onto the desk, breathing in jerks. He put his hand on my back and said, “It’s all right.” He patted me. “It’s going to be fine. Just straighten up and type the letter again.”

And I did. I went to my desk, blew my nose, and retyped the letter. I sat for a moment wondering what he wanted me to do. Finally, I went into his office and put the letter on his desk. He didn’t look up. I didn’t linger. When I returned to my desk, I saw that a client had come in. He was the man suing his neighbors whose dog barked. As soon as he saw me, he stood up and started in about the dog. He did not seem to realize that I had been crying. Ned Johnson came out of his office smiling, the letter in his hand. He said, “Good job.”

•

When I got into the car with my mother, everything was normal. We drove past the usual stores and signs and intersections, looked at other people sitting in their cars. I felt something rising up in me that I could not let my mother see.

When we got home, I went upstairs to take a nap, like I always did. But, instead of sleeping, I fidgeted and turned and thought about the thing that had happened. Normally, I didn’t like anything related to sex. The way people had talked about it at school made it seem like something disgusting that popular kids did. Still, I tried to fit in. One day, I borrowed a pair of Donna’s pants because they were tight on me and sexy. When I walked past the boys who sat on the radiator every day, they stared at me as if they’d never seen me before. One of them said, “Motherfucker.” Like he couldn’t believe it. The one time somebody tried to kiss me was at a party Donna took me to. He was a dumb drunk kid and he wouldn’t leave me alone. I didn’t know what to do, so I hit him. I hit him with my fist, and he stumbled back holding his face. The whole room went, “Whoa!” Somebody yelled “Psycho!,” and I went outside and sat in the car until Donna came out to drive us home.

But the thing that had happened with the lawyer wasn’t like that. When I thought about it, alone, under my covers, with my panty hose pulled down, I felt more alive than I ever had, the overpowering aliveness of something that’s just burst out of its hiding place. I masturbated for the first time, wanting the “climax” I had heard about. I went fast, then slow, wanting to make it last. But there was no climax. Just this huge feeling: abnormally alive and half-dead at once. It was weird but also comforting to be having such a feeling under the ripped crazy quilt that my aunt had made for me a long time ago. There, on the dresser, was my ceramic weather poodle, permanently stuck between lavender and gray; there was my father yelling at my mother over the TV. I was still doing it when Donna pounded on the door and called “Dinner!”

It was around this time that I began to dream of the lawyer. These were mundane but also beautiful dreams. Mostly I dreamed that we were at the office, doing something ordinary. Once, I dreamed that we were walking in a field of red flowers, holding hands. Whatever we were doing was suffused with warmth, kindness, and understanding. Like the personal conversation we’d had, only better.

•

I tried hard not to make any more mistakes, and for a few weeks I didn’t. He seemed to appreciate the effort; he was in a good mood, and twice I found a box of strawberry doughnuts on my desk. But then I made a formatting mistake, which he pointed out but forgave, and then two separate spelling mistakes, which made him furious. One of those times, instead of spanking me he told me to bend over his desk and look at the mistake and say “I am stupid” over and over.

Whether it happened or not, I would go home and get into bed and try to climax. I still couldn’t, and I wondered if maybe people were making that part up. Donna would pound on the door and I would go down for dinner. We would eat and I would feel my distance from and closeness to my family, as if everything that mattered about me were as remote as the moon, connected to them only by a single stalk of something tough that linked me to them mindlessly and even heartlessly.

•

The last time I made a typing mistake he didn’t spank me. He jerked off on me. He told me to pull my skirt up and my panty hose down. For the first time, I was afraid. I turned my head to look at him, but I couldn’t see him. He said, “Are you afraid I’m going to rape you? Don’t be. I’m not interested.” I thought, I do not have to do this. I can walk away. But I didn’t. I stayed bent over the desk as if bent by his words in the same way that his words had once turned my head. I pulled my skirt up and my panty hose down. He did it.

•

For a long time I forgot about the particulars of this. Or I just didn’t think about them. Then suddenly, randomly, I remembered. I was watching a movie with Jason, the man who, with time, became my husband. It was a movie about imprisoned clairvoyants who predict murders before they happen. Sexless and obedient, the clairvoyants lay in artificial sleep, nearly submerged in pools of water, connected to a huge machine monitored by vigilant detectives. A clairvoyant would dream of a murder, and fragmented images of violence would flicker before the detectives. Without understanding why, I began to cry silently. A clairvoyant awakened and rose out of the water, eyes eerily wide. Tears ran down my face.

It wasn’t until we were in bed that night (Jason asleep, his warm back buttressing mine) that the memory came, flickering like the images of violence in the movie. I didn’t see it as if from my own point of view; I didn’t see the letter before me or the desk or the objects on the desk or my own hands. I saw as if I were watching a movie of the lawyer and me, viewed from behind and to the side. He and I were at the center of an active darkness, the kind that closes in just before you pass out. His back was hunched at the shoulders, his arm working furiously. There was my exposed thigh and small half butt, a piece of my shoulder, my forearm, my hidden face. Terrible deadness and aliveness.

•

I didn’t go back to work the next day and he didn’t call me. For days I lay in bed without sleeping, without changing my clothes, barely eating, my family like an outmoded contraption rumbling around me, familiar noises that had lost meaning happening at appointed intervals. I told my parents that I was sick, which was, in a way, true; they averted their eyes and left me alone. Together, we lumbered through weeks of pain and comfort: me helping my mother around the house; seeing to dinner while she went for last-minute groceries; walking with Donna at night; watching sitcoms with their bewildering store of understandable characters and jokes; masturbating over and over, always thinking about the thing.

My husband used to say, “When you’re young, you think your life’s a tragedy. You get old, you realize it’s a comedy.” That is really true. I finally talked about Ned Johnson in a support group, but the other people were disgusted when I said I thought about him and masturbated. Or maybe they were disgusted because I said that what had happened with him made me feel alive for the first time. Either way, they acted like they thought I was lying or trying to be special. Or maybe it was just the therapist who acted that way, but it felt like everybody. Later, I saw a regular therapist who thought it was transformative that I’d masturbated because it was “owning” my experience. Then I saw another one, who agreed, but thought that I’d become “stuck” at some stage of the transformation. She wanted me to masturbate in front of her because she thought it would be completing to relive the experience with her. She said that I didn’t have to be naked, that it would be O.K. to reach into my pants or under a skirt. I actually tried doing it over my pants, which sometimes works for me. But it was just too weird. Like I said: a comedy.

•

I got my last paycheck from Ned Johnson in the mail. There was a handwritten letter, on the office stationery, folded up with the check. It said that he was sorry for “what happened between us.” He realized that he’d made a terrible mistake and begged me to understand. He asked me not to tell anyone. He said he would give me a great reference. He signed it “Yours.” The check was for three hundred and eighty dollars, two hundred and ten more than he owed me.

It shames me to remember how I lingered over the word “Yours.” But I did. I felt relief that he didn’t hate me, that he’d thought about me. The odd amount of money made me feel as though he’d given me everything he could. I put the check in the bank. I made up my mind to get another job and save for an apartment; me and Donna talked about moving in together.

I was looking at the want ads again when my father stuck a news article under my nose. “Did you see what your old boss is doing?” he said. I looked. Ned Johnson was running for mayor of Westland. “What do you think about that?” My father’s voice was taunting, the way it was with Donna. I said, “Nothing,” and stared at the want ads. My father stood there for a long time as if he wanted to say something else. But he didn’t.

Maybe a week later, I answered the phone and it was a man asking for me. He said he was Mark Charming—I remember because it was like a joke name—from Detroit Magazine. He said that Ned Johnson was running for public office. My mother was vacuuming two rooms over. So I felt safe saying yes, I knew. He said that he was doing a story on Ned Johnson that could affect the outcome of the election. He said that I might have relevant, important information that the public should know. He said that I wasn’t alone, that there were other women. He said that my privacy would be protected. The vacuum shut off. I said, “I can’t talk now,” and hung up.

All I could think was that the paralegal had told him. When I’d come out of the office, walking funny with my panty hose still down and wet stuff on my ass, Susan, the paralegal, was standing there with her mouth open. It had to have been her. Who else would it have been? Had she seen us, or did she just tell Mark Charming to call everyone who’d ever worked for Ned Johnson? What if it came on the news? We could all be eating dinner when it came on the news. I was so upset I stopped trying to climax. But it never came on the news. No women gave the public that important information. Then I wondered if maybe the whole thing had been a trick, if Mark Charming was really a friend of Ned Johnson’s and I was being tested.

•

I got a job through Kelly Girl that was supposed to be temporary but went on a long time. They said that Ned Johnson’s recommendation was so good they didn’t know why I’d left. Me and Donna found a place on the second floor of a house in Canton. There was no washing machine there, but we could go home to do the laundry. We went in on a car.

Ned Johnson won the election. Before, I had been afraid that I would run into him at the store or just see him driving in his car; now he probably didn’t go to the same stores as me, and probably his car would have tinted windows. Now the thing that had happened was sealed away in an office that looked closed when I drove past.

Except that it wasn’t really sealed away. Because I thought and felt differently; I looked at people differently. I didn’t even realize it. But now I looked for something in their eyes and voices: a hint of the feeling I had known.

Consciously, I began to search for someone like Ned Johnson but better. Someone I could talk to and do normal things with. Donna sometimes got a newspaper from Ann Arbor with personals in it, and I would secretly read them. Most people just described their appearance and what their hobbies were, if they had pets or not, and what they thought about politics. But once or twice I saw an ad that I read over and over. One of them said, “I am tired of ‘intelligent women.’ I want to meet a dumb, honest woman. No phonies, please.” It took me days to work up the courage to make the call, but when I finally did I was so excited my voice was a squeak. His voice was first depressed and then sounded like he couldn’t believe someone had actually answered the ad. He said, “Well, you’ve passed the first test.” I said, “Test?” And he said, “You called!” and laughed. I hung up.

Then my supervisor asked me out. He wasn’t anything like Ned Johnson. He was a tall, thin guy ten years older than me but with the friendly face of a young dog. Like a friendly dog, he would walk past me on the line (light assembly) with his arms behind his back, and then, at the last second, turn his head to look at me, nodding like a boss who can afford to be nice. I was surprised that he liked me, because the last girl he’d dated (another Kelly girl) had a sleek, perfect body and a blocky, confident jaw, stylish pink eyeshadow, and complex hair. But he did like me. And I liked him, though he was the opposite of the lawyer. His body was delicate; his eyes were gentle and they let you in.

I imagined that he nodded when he walked by because he saw what I wanted, because he knew. I imagined that it would be like with the lawyer but different, with kissing and warm eyes. I thought we would do the thing, maybe once, maybe a bunch of times, and then, instead of jerking off on me, he would take my virginity. But it didn’t happen that way. We went to a diner and then to his house. There was kissing, and he put on some music and then he took my virginity. It was so painful I couldn’t even think about the lawyer. He said he was honored to be my first. I wanted to tell him what I wanted but I couldn’t see how. Still, somehow the feeling was there, in his hands, the way he guided me onto the bed, and put a pillow under me. And it was safe with him. I felt protected by his body and by his young boss face, as if he were guarding the place I disappeared into to think about Ned Johnson and, finally, on our third date, to climax, which he loved. At work the next day, he walked past me and boss-nodded as if nothing had happened. Which I loved.

For a few months we went to the diner after work and sometimes to a nice place that served mostly steak. There was a jukebox with hot-colored lights rippling between dream and nightmare, and it seemed like every time we were there someone played “Dancing in the Moonlight”—such a fine and natural sight. It was gentle, hopeful music. The waitress brought beautiful drinks that looked alcoholic. I thought with amazement, This is what life is supposed to be. My boss talked to me about his ex-wife; he asked me what I wanted to do. When I told him that I wanted to take classes and get a degree, he said that was great. Once, the gentle hope of the song made me cry and he held my hand.

He said he couldn’t commit, because he wasn’t over the divorce. But, still, when he ended it I was sick with pain. I can’t remember the actual pain, because of the way your mind protects you. But I remember hardening inside. I remember thinking, I can’t have love, so I should just go for the thing.

•

That was 1984. People were listening to artistic songs about bondage and murder and women being on fire—really, these were old songs, but they were new to me. Donna was dying her hair blue and wearing cheap leather jackets that didn’t look good on her, but it didn’t matter. We could still go to the bars and even dance. I was shy of dancing at first, but you didn’t have to really dance; people acted like they were mentally ill and just waved their arms around and crashed into one another. Once, a guy I danced with started slapping me. I thought he really might be mentally ill, so I walked away from him, though it made me think that perhaps I could ask normal guys to slap me.

But, when I finally asked somebody, he didn’t want to do it. I was embarrassed and surprised. He’d talked so rudely right away that I was sure he would. He was ugly but also cocky, and he talked about how he hated girls who thought they were so hot. But, when I got with him and I asked him if he fantasized about punishing girls, he looked at me like I was crazy. He said no, never. I said, “Never?” So he thought awhile and said that once he saw a sort of porn movie with a scene where a beautiful Black woman whipped a beautiful white woman; he liked that. But he thought maybe that was just because he liked Black women especially? So I said maybe we could think about a Black woman whipping me and just concentrate on that while we were doing it. He said yes, so it kind of worked out for a little while.

Later, some men did want to do more kinky stuff, way more than Ned Johnson; one of them tied me up and gagged me and hit me hard enough to leave marks. But, no matter what they did, it was a weak imitation of the thing. It was never like him simply speaking and me bending.

Meanwhile, there was the rest of life. Me and Sandy kept in touch; our friendship got more real. I drove to Kalamazoo to visit her and went with her to get a new rabbit. She had a better job by then, in a medical office, and we had a good time going to a sidewalk festival. Donna met someone she really liked who worked at the state home, and I didn’t want to go out by myself, so it was hard to meet guys. I answered a few personal ads but they didn’t work out. A guy who came into an office where I was a temp asked me out, but that didn’t work, either.

Years went by. I started taking classes at night and thought about getting an advanced degree. My mother thought I should work toward a teaching certificate. But I didn’t want that. I didn’t know what I wanted. I took an English class and a psychology class, which I didn’t complete, for some reason. I took a history class and got an A-minus, but in a biology class my first test was a D. I was so scared of failing that I dropped it.

My mother was disappointed; she invited me over so that she and my dad could pressure me at dinner. The news was on in the background; a Supreme Court nominee was accused of saying dirty things to a woman who worked for him. I told them that Donna was planning to move in with the guy from the state home and I needed to work more hours if I wanted to keep the place on my own. My mother said that I could move back in with them if it would help me take classes. I got up and put my plate in the dishwasher. On the TV, people were still talking about the accusations, pro and con. My father said, “They want the Black man to get ahead, but look at this one, how they’re holding him back.” His tone was incredulous. My mother mildly agreed: “That’s right.”

•

When I was twenty-eight, I met Jason. I was standing on a corner somewhere in Livonia, waiting for the light to change, and these two guys were there and one of them said, “She’s cute.” The other one said, “Yeah, but she looks like a bad banana. Nice outside, all bruised inside.” It didn’t occur to me that I was being insulted. I just said, “That’s true.” He said, “Yeah?” The light changed and I crossed the street. But the next day I thought about him, his voice when he said, “Yeah?” I went back to that corner a couple of times. I’d walk around, in and out of stores, or just stand on the corner, pretending to consult a piece of paper, but I never saw him.

Then fate happened. When Donna moved out, she left a box of old records in the apartment; she said that if I could sell them for her she would split the money with me. I took the box to a used-record shop, and saw him there looking through a bin. I left the records at the counter and put myself across from him, and when he looked up I said hi. I could see he didn’t recognize me, so I said, “I’m the bad banana.” Even then he didn’t know; my face flushed and so, to be nice, he shrugged and said, “You don’t look so bad.” And we stood there awkwardly, until he said, “You want to get a coffee or—?” Later, he told me he still hadn’t quite remembered who I was, but he knew he’d seen me before. He said he realized where right after we ordered coffee; he said he was turned on that I was blushing. He said, “You were obviously a shy person. But the way you came up to me wasn’t shy at all.”

We saw each other on and off for more than six years. During that time, Donna got married and had a baby. Even Sandy got married and had a baby. I got a perma-temp job at Ford, training people to use computers for more money than I made. A few months after I got the job, a guy holding public office in Lansing got sued for some kind of sexual misbehavior; I don’t remember what it was, but there were demonstrations and protests with signs. I do remember that the guy dared his accusers to go to trial; he described how one of them had actually wanted sex with him and he’d refused her. As if embarrassed, the protesting women just went away.

Right after that came the story about Ned Johnson. I heard it in my car, while I was going home from work. Unknown to me, he’d been making a run for state senator; unknown to me, it was his second run—he’d lost the first time. This time he was favored to win, so his decision to withdraw from the race made the news. When his voice came on, I was too distracted to drive. By the time I’d pulled into a spot, he’d finished talking. “Family trouble,” he’d said.

I remembered Mark Charming. I wondered. It was not on that day but maybe the next one that I drove by Ned Johnson’s former law office; the lawn was overgrown and weeds were coming up through the paving stones of the walkway. There was a sign advertising drug-counselling services.

I was glad to know that at least the state had rejected him the last time he’d tried. But when I searched for him online (it was late in the nineties by then and you could do that), I saw that he was once again presiding over the city of Westland. Otherwise, most of what I found was too boring to justify the humiliating act of looking. I promised my therapist I would not do it again; it was a promise I kept for a long time.

Being with Jason helped. He drove a taxi and worked long shifts. He was very intelligent. He liked to talk about music and books. I first realized this when I turned up “Dancing in the Moonlight” on the radio and he said, “You like that?” And, when I said yes, he was quiet and listened. He said, “O.K. He’s got interesting phrasing. And the keyboard has something cool going on.” I’d never heard anybody talk that way about a song, but, more than that, I’d never seen anybody decide to listen differently to something he thought was crap.

But he drank too much and disappeared for weeks sometimes, then just showed up at my place singing some Bananarama song. He was with other women. We quarrelled and broke up, got back together, broke up. During this time, my father was hospitalized with heart failure. I got the call at work and left early; I remember the traffic was horrible. Donna was there already. She’d brought her new baby and her three-year-old. In a saccharine voice, my mother said, “And here are your grandchildren!” My father looked at the children with a deep, sad face. The three-year-old looked back, solemn and remote. I drove to the lawyer’s old office late at night and just sat in the car.

•

Woven through it all, the dreams; varied scenes laid out in an endless warren of secret rooms, separated from daily life by narrow doorways and flimsy partitions. The lawyer comes to my family home to ask me out on a date. He chats with my father. Donna is on the phone in the next room. I lick his balls; he comes in a wastebasket. There is a feeling of friendly normalcy and even affection. He appears on the TV screen, talking to me about his wife; oddly, he can’t remember her name, but he shows me her picture. I say, “She has a great body!” I am acting. I am in the high-school play; he appears backstage, and I kneel and bow my head while he tells me that my performance wasn’t any good. I want him so much. Upstairs in my bedroom, I suck his dick and he comes explosively. But, as he’s leaving, he tells me that, because I wasn’t good enough, he’s going to give me a bad reference. My father asks if he treated me “like shit,” and I say, “No, not at all.” My father says, “That’s too bad—he should.” The lawyer summons me to his office to express concern about how Jason is treating me. He says that I deserve better, that I am an amazing secretary. We are working together in a bizarre office where people are made to play elaborate games, which someone must eventually lose. A homely older woman loses and has to be spanked by everyone in the office. People spank her and laugh. She looks furious. The lawyer smirks and catches my eye; I look away, but am secretly aroused. The spanked older woman in my dream actually came from a real story in a national magazine. There was a picture of her looking outraged in a nice plaid business suit. She was suing the company she worked for; I don’t know if she won or lost. I remember me and Jason joking about it.

•

After we’d been apart for about four years, Jason e-mailed to tell me that he was sober and had started his own taxi company. He’d thought about us and was sorry he had ruined it. He had realized that I was the most real woman he’d known. He said I’d cared more about the truth than about compliments or insults. In the same spirit, he told me something he’d kept hidden: he’d fathered a girl with another woman before he met me and had been too immature to deal with the responsibility. He was now trying to help take care of the girl, whose name was Petra.

I was moved by this. I answered him, and we saw each other. But we took it slow. I didn’t meet Petra until we decided that we were really going to be together. She was thirteen by then, sombre and plain and so reserved that my dominant memories of her are all with her head down, looking away. I was nearly as reserved with her, and that was, I sensed, what made her comfortable with me.

When Petra was fourteen, Jason decided to get a place in the country so she could be in nature and see horses. He sold his company and started another taxi service, in Tecumseh, a small town about an hour away, where he bought a little house set back from the road with a huge rhododendron in the front. After a few years of driving back and forth, I left the apartment I’d lived in since 1984 to move in with him. I was able to get a job at a cleaning service and then eventually an admin position at Washtenaw Community College.

My mother asked me if I minded helping to raise someone else’s child instead of having my own. But I didn’t. I liked having Petra come every other weekend. I didn’t try to get close to her. I let her initiate. Sometimes, when we sat on the screened porch making small talk, I felt closer to her than to my nieces.

But even Jason asked if I wanted a baby of my own. I thought about it, but the idea of having a child contradicted something basic in me—the secret life of ritual humiliation that was part of our intimacy. That was just not a place where babies came from. And although I never said it to myself, I knew: a child should not sense her mother being humiliated. She should not be born with that in the cells of her body. It was easy to be good to Petra because she had not come from my body, the nexus of the thing. I hinted at this to Jason, but he didn’t fully understand. Which was fine. It would only have upset him.

More than fine—it was the happiest I’ve ever been. Under blankets together with the wind outside. The long drives to work in winter, the radio playing as the icy morning broke, patches of church music and preachers talking in and out of sexy songs; in the spring, the gray road with its broken yellow line taking us through the ragged green, the shadows of branches passing over the windshield. The dappled horse we had for a while; Petra standing in the yard with him, her hand on his slightly swayed back; tenderness. The sun on the floor of the screened porch, the sawing motion of the ancient glider chairs. Petra’s smooth brown hair and shy laughter.

But after she grew older and moved away from the area there was something missing that we couldn’t recover. That was when I became aware of the pain in my heart. It woke me almost every night, a feeling of deprivation and hurt so strong it was almost physical. I sometimes woke Jason up and asked him to touch my chest, over my heart, where it hurt the most. He would, and sometimes it would help; I could feel him in my heart. But more often he was distracted and tired and fell asleep in the middle of it.

It was not an ugly breakup. I was able to take my time finding an apartment back in Canton and another perma-temp position. It was sadly pleasurable to sink into my former routines, to see the same stores and sit at the same intersections, listening to the radio. I visited my mother. She’d moved out of our house and into a complex with a sliding-glass window, good light, and soothing traffic noise from Walton Boulevard. We both went to Donna’s house for Thanksgiving and Christmas. We just sat around snacking while the kids watched TV, phone fingers dancing.

Being in Canton, of course, reminded me of Ned Johnson. But I maintained my decision not to Google him.

•

I dated a little online. The best was this guy in Canada. We were both struggling with our weight and we encouraged each other. We both liked to dance, and we decided that if we lost the right number of pounds we would dance together online. And we actually did! I picked a song and practiced and wore makeup and washed my hair as if it were a date, and it was so much fun. Because I can move. I don’t know how, because no one ever showed me and I almost never do it, but I can dance. He told me I was sexy. He told me next time we should do it naked. I said I wasn’t sure but finally I agreed. I chose a more romantic song and practiced. I decided I would ask to keep my underwear on. But then he didn’t show up. I never heard from him again.

“I’d say you dodged a bullet,” Donna said. “If you’d gotten naked he could’ve recorded it and put it up somewhere. Probably he would’ve.”

It was right around then that the stories about shitty men came out. I saw it first on TV, a guy being charged with raping a ton of actresses and singers. Then there was another guy just like him; another guy not quite like him but sort of like him; another guy suspiciously a little like him. Suddenly, in newspapers and magazines and online, there were stories of men everywhere, raping and touching and masturbating or just saying stupid, dirty things. It was like a feverish mass dream of exposure and righteous crying out “No more! ”

At first, I felt sullen about it. I didn’t even know why. It just felt like these girls were complainers. Like they wanted to let everybody know how desirable they were, how men were always trying to kiss them or touch them or fuck them. Because, if men want you like that, it means you have value. One night I woke up and thought, If he’d raped me I could’ve told people and they would respect it, or at least pretend to. Because rape you can at least understand. But he didn’t rape me. He wasn’t interested. He said so. I was too worthless even for that. If I’d reported it, I would’ve been reporting my lack of worth.

I sat up and put my hands on my chest, quieting the pain. Except it wasn’t pain—it was anger. I thought, He did this to me. It seemed outrageously simple, so simple that I was astonished I hadn’t thought of it before, so simple that my mind veered away from it. I thought, I don’t want to give him that much power. Then I thought, But it wasn’t me who gave it.

In the morning, the anger, like the pain, was far away and vague.

Secretly, I came over to the side of the women who didn’t want to accept or tolerate any more. But it was too late for me, and not just because of being old. The thing was inside me and I couldn’t make it go away without making myself go away.

But I wondered. I wondered about Mark Charming from Detroit Magazine. I had remembered his name all these years. The man who had called me so long ago to see if I could reveal “important information” about Ned Johnson. I decided I would call him. It took a few days, because I felt that, once I made that call, I would set something in motion, something potentially awful. But, when I did call, the person who answered the phone told me that there was no one at the magazine with that name. I said O.K. and hung up. Then I called back. I asked if there was someone to whom I could report a story about sexual assault in the workplace. They put me through to the voice mail of a warm-voiced woman named Clarice. While I was waiting to leave the message, I heard (in my head) the voice of the lawyer telling me that I was a deeply good person. But “complex.” Too much feeling rushed through me; the message I left after the beep was so unclear that I didn’t think Clarice would call me back.

Feelings of fear, yes. Deep, amazed fear of this person who had been able to reach inside me and activate a thing I had not even known was there, this person who had also activated an entire city to vote him into office, and then the entire state to consider him as a congressman. Fear complicated with incredulity—this person?—and anger and arousal. Yes, I was aroused. Not enough to masturbate. But enough to Google him for the first time in years.

Naturally, a lot of people named Ned Johnson came up at first. I had to type in “Mayor of Westland” to find an archived newspaper story that mentioned that he’d been the mayor of that rathole before making an unsuccessful run for Congress; the subject of the article was his surprising withdrawal from a second run, when he was ahead in the polls. Otherwise, it was almost as if he’d been erased. And then I saw it: a notice for Ned Johnson, Esq., attorney at law. I felt an eerie tingle; the address of his office was actually the same as it had been.

I was looking at the address and the Google Maps picture (there were flowers in the window boxes now, ragged purple and blurred orange) when Clarice returned my call. She asked if I had called her office about a case of sexual assault; she said that I had not left my name. I said I guessed I was pretty nervous.

Clarice understood. “When did it happen?” she asked. When I told her, she was silent for a beat too long; she asked how old I was. I told her my age at the time; I felt her interest return. I told her that it was my employer at my first job; I told her that he’d later become mayor of Westland. I could hear her fingers Googling. Her voice was wonderful, taut with restraint, bright and honed as she drew a hard bead. “Can you tell me what happened?”

I couldn’t. I tried. I used the words I had read: inappropriate touching. Assault. Masturbating. Verbal abuse. It was all the truth. But it did not describe it. I did not say what he actually did. I left out the thing. My voice was halting and high; it did not sound like me. She asked if there was penetration. I said no. She asked if I had told anyone at the time. I said a reporter had called me when he ran for office but I had not told him. She said hmm, she did not know a Mark Charming; he must’ve left some time ago. She asked if there were any possible witnesses. I said no, because I had forgotten about maybe Susan. She said she believed me but, without penetration, it could not be considered sexual assault in the first degree and the statute of limitations for second or third had passed. I had not thought of that. I said that Mark Charming had mentioned other women; I said that if he was calling me without even knowing what had happened to me probably something worse had happened with the other women. I said that back in the nineties, when that sex scandal happened in Lansing? Ned Johnson wasn’t the one accused, it was someone else, a politician, but immediately afterward Ned Johnson had withdrawn from a congressional race, even though he’d been ahead in the polls, and I’d thought maybe he was hiding something? She was silent for a long moment. When she spoke, her voice was very kind. She said that she was interested but what I’d said was not enough to go on. I was welcome to call her again. And she was going to dig around about Mark Charming.

My voice, when I said thank you and goodbye, was alien and repellent. But it was strong and clear when I said to my empty room, “How absurd!” I even laughed. “All of it, stupid, absurd!” I looked at the phone number for Ned Johnson, Esq. I didn’t even have to think. I punched it in. The lady who answered sounded like a thousand other ladies who answer. I said I wanted to discuss what action I might take against my neighbor whose dog barked all goddam day. She recommended small claims. I said I’d already tried that. I got the appointment, the last one of the day. I gave my name as Deborah Doe, not Debby Roe.

•

I left work two hours early in order to make it, this long-delayed assignation at the central destination on my invisible map. Finally, I was making a beeline. I was wearing my best work outfit—my light-gray skirt-suit and a new blouse, mauve with scalloped details at the collar and cuffs. It was a nice day. The traffic lights all coöperated with me. If my heart was pounding, I did not feel it.

The parking lot was the same small, thinly gravelled area behind the house; mine became the only car in it. I wondered if I would see the same crazy furniture, which, it just occurred to me, could’ve come from the Salvation Army. The doorknob stuck and I had to fight it, causing me to burst in. The standard older woman behind the standard desk was not startled. She said, “Ms. Doe?,” and I answered, “Yes.”

The furniture all matched and even looked high-endish. There were basic framed pictures on the walls. The secretary was tough, efficient, and servile; I wondered how long she’d been with him. She spoke into the intercom; she told me he would be with me in a moment.

He opened the door, hand extended. His face: the deep lines in his forehead and cheeks had a look of violence about them, more like wounds than like the marks of age. His eyes, blank and fierce, peered from under thick folds of heavy, purpled skin. The patches of discoloration on his skin made him look almost as though he’d been beaten. I did not take his offered hand; unoffended, he retracted it. “Come in,” he said. “Sit down.”

I took a few steps in and said, “I prefer to stand.”

“All right,” he said affably. “I’ll stand with you.”

We faced each other, he leaning against his desk. I had not taken his aging into account. While he was standing, his full diminishment was apparent—the paunch, the shrunken chest and shoulders, stiffened as if in preparation for blows. I had forgotten that he would be over seventy.

“So,” he said. “Tell me about this dog.”

“It barks all day and sometimes at night,” I said without conviction. “It wakes me up.”

“And you’ve spoken to the owner?”

“Yes, I think he may be abusing”—my voice caught on the word—“abusing it. I know—does this seem strange? Has anyone ever come to you with anything like this?”

“As a matter of fact, yes. I don’t remember very well, but, yes, I believe there was . . . something.” He looked down, as if in thought.

Softly I said, “Do you remember?”

He looked up and there it was, the beam of his ruthless animal attention. He fixed me with it. I fixed back. He straightened up and went to sit behind his desk. I went farther into the room. He leaned back in his chair and said, very coldly, “Tell me what you mean to say.”

“So you remember?”

“Remember what?” Genuinely irritable, reflexively curious. “The dog case?”

“Debby Roe. Do you remember that name?” I paused. “Do you remember me?”

His lips parted, and then surprise dawned on his old, beat-up face; warmth lit his receded eyes. “Debby? The girl who came with her mother?” He relaxed and sat forward, smiling—smiling—for a long, pleased moment. “You’re much changed,” he said.

“So are you,” I said, sharply.

“I didn’t recognize you. But I remember you. How’ve you been?”

I didn’t know what to say. I just stood there. Like I had so long ago.

“Are you married? Kids?”

“Yes,” I said. “Or I was for a while. And . . . I raised his daughter from a previous marriage. Or I helped.”

He nodded vigorously. “Similar. Married, past tense. No kids. I wanted them, but she couldn’t. That, really, that broke us up. That and something else that might not surprise you.”

“Nothing would surprise me,” I said flatly.

He laughed and pointed playfully at me. “I always knew you had a dry sense of humor!” He came back out from behind the desk and casually sat on it with one hip. He indicated a chair. “Come on, sit down!”

I did. I sat down in his reality as if I’d never left it.

“I don’t think you came here about a dog.” He paused; I shook my head. “So why did you come?”

“Guess,” I said.

“I hope not to shoot me.” (Smiling.)

“Why would I do that?” (Not smiling.)

For the first time, he looked uncomfortable. “Listen,” he said. “I don’t want to play games.” He stood up straight. “I understand how inappropriate I was, especially to you. I even knew that at the time, you were so young, so—” He began to pace, walking past me to the window and back. “And there were others I overstepped with, much worse than with you. And I was punished. I mean, punished. The secretary after you—she was some years after you, I was married by then—God! That wrecked my life, my marriage, finally everything. I lost my standing, my career. I’m lucky I’m not cancelled, because, believe me, I have to work. All my money was spent—”

“On paying people off?”

His shoulders sagged. “Yes,” he said. “Yes, Debby, that was some of it.” He took a few steps closer and looked at me intensely. “Listen. I told you I was sorry at the time, and I meant it. I mean it now. It may not matter, but you were the only one I felt that way about. Because you were different.”

He stood and walked back to the desk and sat on it again, fully this time. He said, “I thought you were probably a virgin.”

“I was.”

He closed his eyes. “I knew it.”

I stood. “I guess that’s why you didn’t want to fuck me.”

He opened his eyes.

“You were too moral to spoil a virgin.”

He frowned slightly; his hand came to his jaw. “What are you—?”

I went closer. “Or were you really just ‘not interested’?”

Slowly, he took his hand from his jaw. The gleam in his eyes was filthy.

“Oh,” he said. “I was interested. I was very interested. I just—”

I tried to kick him in the balls, but he squeezed his legs together. I hit him in the face, slapping wildly; he merely ducked his head. On his desk, I saw a heavy mug of pencils and pens; I grabbed it up, spilling the contents.

“No!” he said, grappling at my arm. “Debby, stop it!”

“Filth!” I cried. “Ugly, filthy!”

There was loud knocking on the door. When he turned toward it, I banged him in the head with the mug as hard as I could. He winced, trying to protect himself. I hit him again. The mug broke, and pieces fell to the floor.

The door opened just slightly. “Mr. Johnson, is everything all right?”

We froze in our positions. “No worries,” he said to the door. “We’re fine.”

The door closed.

He looked at me, amazed. His head was cut where I’d hit him. I returned what was left of the mug to the desk. I said, “You knew I was a virgin and you did that sick shit?”

With his eyes, he indicated the chair. “Could you sit?”

I shook my head but stepped back a bit. He stayed where he was. The brown of his eyes was faded, ringed with cloudy gray; my pity flared and died.

“What happened was wrong, O.K.? But it wasn’t just me doing something to you. You . . .” He looked down and paused. “You responded.”

I didn’t answer. My heart was pounding and I felt it—the sadness and bewilderment of my dreams.

He smiled wanly. “See, that’s what I . . . that’s what makes you different. You don’t deny it. That was how I knew your innocence. That was why I respected you.”

My anger returned. I concealed it. “How many girls did you do that with?” I asked.

He frowned dismissively. “What do you mean by that? There was no ‘that.’ What happened . . . it was all different. Sometimes I could hold back like, thank God, I did with you. Sometimes it was . . . this is difficult to talk about.”

“Do you know Mark Charming?” I asked.

He blinked. “The gossip columnist? Sure, I knew him. He was a real pest, but he’s been dead for twenty years. Why?”

“Never mind,” I said. “It’s not important.”

I thought, in vague gray flickers, of the movie that had made me remember what happened, without at first knowing what I was remembering. I thought of the end of the movie, the would-be killers pardoned and released.

“I’ve never spoken about any of this to anyone,” he said. He was looking at me expectantly.

I looked out a window at a chain-link fence, a patch of lawn, the back of somebody’s house. The light had changed. People would be driving home now, looking forward to dinner with their families.

His intercom sounded. He reached across his desk and picked up the phone. “Finishing up here,” he told it. “Yes, that’s fine.” He hung up, went behind the desk, got his jacket off the back of the chair, and slowly put it on. He took a wadded Kleenex from a pocket and dabbed his forehead with it; he checked it for blood. “Is there anything else?” he said. “Anything you need from me?”

Idly, I wondered if he was offering me money. “No,” I said. “That’s O.K.” I stood and reached for my purse; I had dropped it on the floor at some point.

“All right,” he said. “Thanks for listening. And if you’d like to talk more—”

“No,” I said, shaking my head. “That’s all.” I turned and headed for the door. I had just walked out when he came up behind me.

“Debby,” he said. “I want to know something.”

The secretary wasn’t there. We were alone. When I turned and saw his expression, I was afraid. He was old, but he was still bigger than me.

“Do you remember the first time? Do you remember the way I held your hand?”

My brows and mouth made shapes of disbelief.

“Well, not—I didn’t hold it, but, when I saw, at the end, that you were shaking, I put my hand over your hand. And you, you put your pinkie finger over my index. You held it there. Do you remember?”

My skin flushed. He looked at me, eyes so much sadder and softer now but still boring in, searching. As if telepathically, I heard his voice say, Please.

In the same way, silently, I said, No.

•

Quickly, I went to my car. Quickly, I left the parking lot, hands trembling, driving as though I were asleep. Because I did remember, and, for a long moment, past and present blurred, allowing me to feel that secret touch between us, the crux of tenderness and pain that lived in my dreams. But only for a moment. The spell had weakened and come apart.

I was halfway home when I realized that I was hungry. I headed to Meijer’s—they had a store where the A. & P. used to be—to pick up something for dinner. I thought about Clarice, at Detroit Magazine. I imagined her invisibly listening to my confrontation with Ned Johnson. I imagined her frowning mouth when he said that he’d covered my hand with his, and that I’d held his finger. I pulled into the Meijer’s lot. I took my phone out of my purse. I thought, if the story came out now, everybody was going to ask, “Why did you wait so long?” People would joke about it; they’d masturbate over it. And I could hardly blame them!

I smiled, sort of. Because at least I’d hit him in the head. I put my phone back in my purse. I would think on it again tomorrow. Tomorrow, the waking world would finally have its say. I got out of the car and went to get dinner. I was starving. ♦