Title: Red Pyramid
Author: Vladimir Sorokin

To put it plainly, Yura confused Fryazino with Fryazevo and went the wrong way. Natasha had explained everything to him: go to Yaroslavsky Station and take the train toward Fryazevo or toward Schelkovo. Her station was Zagoryanskaya and not all trains stopped there. The train toward Fryazevo did, but the train toward Fryazino didn’t. Yura ended up on the train toward Fryazino.

“There’s a train at six-fifteen—it runs regularly on weekdays,” Natasha had said, standing in the Dinamo Station and licking the ice cream, sandwiched between two round waffles, that Yura had treated her to. “That train always stops at our station.”

“And how long . . . mmm . . . does it take to get there?” Yura quipped, chomping on his own ice cream and waffles.

“Forty-five minutes.” Natasha smiled. “You’ll be at my stop by seven.”

This was the third time they’d met, but for some reason they were still using the formal word for “you.”

“Will it be a big group?”

“I don’t like small ones!” Natasha laughed, shaking her head.

She always shook her head when she said something funny. Because of this, she came off as too sincere, perhaps even foolishly naïve, but she wasn’t stupid; Yura had quickly figured that out. He liked her more and more. Short, tan, slender, fidgety, and always smiling—she clearly had some southern blood running through her veins. Moldavian or Armenian. Maybe even Jewish. Yura hadn’t asked her about her roots yet. There was always a wave of joy emanating from Natasha. Her hair was black, tied up in two tight braids that encircled her head.

“So can I expect to meet a whole cohort of your admirers?” he asked, finishing his drippy ice cream.

“No doubt!” Natasha shook her head again.

“You got any duelling pistols?”

“My dad’s got a double-barrelled one.”

“I’ll provide the ammunition.”

“Deal!”

Looking at her lips, which were smiling and glistening with ice cream, Yura imagined their first kiss. Perhaps . . . in front of a lilac bush.

“Are there any lilac bushes at your house?” he asked.

“We had one. It was ex-qui-site! But it was dying, so Dad cut it down. There’s just the ti-i-niest bit left.”

Natasha finished her dessert, took a handkerchief out of her jacket pocket, wiped her lips, picked up her satchel, which had been leaning against her slender, nut-brown legs this whole time, wrapped both her arms around it, and pressed it to her stomach.

“Well, I’m off.” Then, bowing her head and looking sideways at Yura, she added, “See you Saturday, Yura.”

“See you Saturday, Natasha!” Yura raised his hand in a fist.

Natasha turned away and hurried down into the subway. She’d turned away from him just as quickly the first time he’d seen her, as she was walking across a balance beam in the gym. Then she’d done an easy cartwheel along the beam, pushed off it, and jumped into the air, her hands spread wide and her head thrown back, exposing her radiant face.

She was a top-ranked student athlete, studying at a pedagogical institute and participating in a student Spartakiada, which Yura, a second-year student in the journalism department of Moscow State University, class of ’63, was reporting on for the university periodical. That was how they’d met.

Then they’d gone to a French film, “Under the Roofs of Paris,” which they’d both already seen: Yura once and Natasha three times.

Then they’d taken a stroll through Gorky Park.

Then Natasha had invited him to her birthday party.

And now . . . Yura had missed his chance.

He was carrying two gifts: a bottle of champagne and a book of poems by Walt Whitman, translated by Kornei Chukovsky. The book, beautifully printed by Akademia Publishers, had been at Yura’s home, nestled among the many other books that Yura’s grandfather had collected. Before today, Yura had glanced at it only once, flipping through it quickly and putting it back on the shelf. But when he started to think about what to get Natasha for her birthday he remembered it. He’d already spent his student stipend on three American jazz records, which he’d bought from scalpers on Kuznetsky Most. The remaining money was just enough for the champagne. Yura had basically not asked his parents for money in two months.

A good poet and a beautiful book, he thought, and put the Whitman into his yellow leather bag along with the champagne, then slung the bag over his shoulder.

On the train, he read Whitman. And realized too late that he was heading the wrong way.

“Could you tell me when we’ll be at Zagoryanka?” he asked a thin old man with a cane and a pail in a string bag.

“Never,” the old man replied laconically. “You got on the wrong train.”

“What?”

“Well . . . the train to Fryazino has never, ever stopped in Zagoryanka.”

Yura jumped up and looked out the window. Bushes and telegraph poles were crawling by.

“What the heck . . .”

“The next stop is Green Pine. Get off there, take this train back to Mytishchi, then get on the train toward Fryazevo.”

“Damn it!” Yura punched his palm impotently.

“There’s no reason to swear,” the old man said, and looked gloomily out the window.

Cursing his own idiocy, Yura picked up his bag and walked into the vestibule. The door was missing, so the June air blustered in.

“Hey, buddy, gimme a smoke!” A voice rang out behind his back.

Yura turned around. A tough-looking guy was leaning against the wall in a corner of the vestibule. Yura hadn’t noticed him when he walked in. Looking unhappily at him, Yura took a half-empty pack of Astra cigarettes and a box of matches out of his pants pocket. He removed one cigarette for himself, then held out the pack. The guy pushed himself off the wall, strode over in his loose black pants, silently pulled out a cigarette, and placed it between his prominent lips. Yura lit his own cigarette and threw the used match over his shoulder.

“Gimme a light, too!” the guy demanded.

Yura hesitated, thinking of telling him it was time to start carrying his own, but ended up lighting a match and putting it to the tip of the man’s cigarette. The guy started to smoke. He had a pale, thin face with wide cheekbones and a steep chin.

“Is Green Pine soon?” Yura asked him crabbily.

“Who the hell knows,” the guy answered. “I’m goin’ to see some fellas in Ivanteevka. I’m not from here. Same with you, right?”

Yura nodded.

The guy examined Yura dully, then leaned back against the wall and, with the cigarette between his wet lips, half-closed his eyes.

Yura turned away and blew smoke out through the door frame.

The train rolled along unhurriedly.

This train is crawling like a turtle, Yura thought furiously. Cretinoid. Idiotium. Stuposaurus . . .

He quickly finished off his cigarette and threw the butt into the dusty greenery the train was passing through. Went back into the carriage. The same passengers were sitting in the same seats. Some of them were looking at Yura and, he felt, smirking.

I’m a laughingstock. And rightly so, he thought.

Yura opened the Whitman and again began to read. Eight pages later, a hoarse voice on the intercom announced, “Green Pine.” Yura picked up his bag, walked out into the vestibule, the lippy man now gone, and took his place next to three women of various ages: an old woman, a full-figured middle-aged woman, and a young girl.

The train braked with an unpleasant screech. Yura got off with the women and looked around. A small number of other passengers were also stepping down onto the wooden platform, then setting off in the direction of a village that was visible in the distance through the trees. The train crawled away.

Realizing that he had to get over to the opposite platform, Yura jumped down onto the railroad ties and crossed the tracks, stepping over the rails, which had grown hot in the sun. As he approached the other side, he surveyed the platform, spotted a set of wooden steps, and climbed up them. There was nobody on the platform. Some cigarette butts lay on the ground. On the long, latticed sign only the word “pine” remained. Yura could just see the outline of the word “green” that had once been there.

“They must be painting the pines red, then,” Yura joked gloomily. He walked over to a bench with peeling white paint, and sat down.

He looked at the Luch watch that his father had given him when he’d got into Moscow State: six-forty-two.

“They’ll start without me.”

He pulled out his cigarettes, then thought better of it and put them away.

“Idiotium!” he pronounced again, looking at the rays of light caught in the branches of the pine trees, and spat onto the filthy flooring.

Twelve minutes passed.

Then thirteen more.

Then twenty more.

The train wasn’t coming.

“Frick me. Happy birthday, Natasha!”

Yura stood up and walked down the platform. There was still not a soul to be seen. The sun was sinking lower in the sky, already hemmed in by the trunks of the trees.

With his bag over his shoulder, Yura began to walk across the dusty boards, slapping his sandals down angrily against them.

“Shitomometer!

“Tearassium!

“Shitassium!”

The boards groaned stupidly under the blows of Yura’s feet. Their groans enraged him. Having walked the entire length of the platform, he turned around, started to run, and tried to do a long jump like a track-and-field athlete, compressing all his fury into his impact on the shabby platform.

“Foolodancius!

“Shitokneadius!”

The boards rattled.

Yura walked up to the latticed sign with the word “pine” on it.

“A pine day!

“I pine for the train!

“oh, suck a pinus!!! when! will! it! come!?”

“In eight minutes,” someone said loudly.

Yura turned around. A man was sitting on the bench he’d just jumped past. This was so unexpected that Yura stopped moving. A fat, puffy-faced man in light summer clothes sat looking at Yura.

“What?” Yura muttered, not believing his own eyes.

“The train will be here in eight minutes,” the man pronounced.

There was no expression on the man’s large, mealy-white, pear-shaped face. No expression at all. Absolutely no expression. It was the first time in his life that Yura had seen a face like that.

“What train?” he asked, unable to look away from the man’s face.

“Your electric locomotive.”

The man’s small, expressionless eyes were fixed on Yura. It seemed to Yura that the man’s face was frozen. And that the man himself . . . was from the morgue. A corpse. A dead man. Yura suddenly began to feel ill, just the way he’d felt when he’d had sunstroke in Baku last summer. His legs trembled.

“Please, sit down,” the man’s frozen lips said. “You look like you have sunstroke. It’s very hot for the beginning of June.”

Yura plopped down onto the bench. He inhaled, coming back to his senses now, and ran his hand across his sweaty forehead.

“It’s better not to practice your long jump in this kind of heat,” the man advised.

Yura noticed just how fat the man was. He hadn’t moved at all and was still staring straight ahead. His clothing was old-fashioned: a white panama hat, a beige summer suit, and a white kosovorotka with an embroidered collar. White canvas shoes peeked out from under his loose beige trousers. A fun friend of Yura’s late grandfather—a coin collector, a joker, a drunk—had dressed this way in the summer; he was also dead. The fat man’s comical shoes––really, they were low boots—brought Yura back to his senses. He exhaled. Inhaled. Exhaled again. He was calmer already. The gloom had suddenly passed. He felt light and cheerful.

Where did he come from? Yura thought. Totally out of the blue . . . Why didn’t I notice him? Did I really, like, overheat?

The fat man stared straight ahead with calm indifference and without changing his position.

“Eight minutes, huh? You know the schedule?” Yura asked.

“Seven now.”

“Do you have a mental stopwatch or something?”

“And that’s not all.”

Yura began to feel even lighter and more cheerful. He laughed with relief and scratched at the back of his neck.

“So you know everything there is to know?”

“Almost.”

“O.K. What’s Mittelspiel ?”

“It’s the middle of a game of chess.”

“Right. What about . . . Betelgeuse?”

“A star in Orion’s Belt. A red supergiant with roughly the same diameter as Jupiter’s orbit around the sun.”

“Exactly right! Now tell me who Dave Brubeck is.”

The fat man’s frozen lips puckered up as he whistled a pretty decent version of “Take Five.”

“Who-o-oa!” Yura gasped. He slapped his knees, then chuckled. “You’re a musician. That’s it, right? And musicians are usually good at chess, right? You play jazz?”

“No,” the fat man replied calmly.

“Come on, that’s got to be it! What do you play? Sax? Trumpet?”

The fat man was silent.

“O.K. A guessing game. Then tell me this: where is . . . hmm . . . Rotten Marsh?”

“In the Selizharovsky District of Tverskaya Oblast.”

Yura was shocked. Rotten Marsh was a place known only in Khutor, the small village where he used to go hunting with his father and grandfather. It was indeed in the Selizharovsky District. Rotten Marsh was a swamp surrounded by a forest. Waterfowl loved nesting there. How could the fat man know that?

He was still sitting on the bench, unmoving.

Was he telepathic? A hypnotist? He had to be a hypnotist! Probably used to work with Wolf Messing. . . . So. Yura had to trip him up somehow.

He examined his surroundings. And suddenly, in the middle distance, in front of a one-story building made of white silicate brick, he saw a faded poster on a large panel: “our goal is communism!”

Lenin’s profile was visible beneath the slogan.

“Tell me who Vladimir Ilyich Lenin was, then,” Yura demanded loudly, folding his arms victoriously across his chest.

“The man who called forth the pyramid of the red roar,” the fat man replied calmly.

Yura opened his mouth.

“What? The pyramid? Of the red . . . what?”

“The red roar.”

“What kind of pyramid is that?”

“The source of the endless red roar.”

“And where is it?”

“In the center of our capital.”

“Where, exactly?”

“Where the center is.”

“In the Kremlin?”

“No. On Red Square.”

“On the square itself? A pyramid?”

“Yes.”

“But where is it on the square? Concretely.”

“Its base takes up the entire square.”

“The entire square?”

Yura laughed. The fat man was still sitting with the same imperturbable calm.

“You know,” Yura said, “I live pretty close to Red Square, on Pyatnitskaya. But I’ve never noticed a red pyramid around there.”

“You can’t see it.”

“But you can?”

“Yes.”

O.K., then, Yura thought. The guy has hallucinations.

“And what does this pyramid do?”

“Emits the red roar.”

“Like a loudspeaker?”

“More or less. But it emits a different kind of sound wave. Different vibrations.”

“And why does it . . . emit them?”

“To infect the world with the red roar.”

“Why?”

“To destroy mankind’s intrinsic structure.”

“Destroy it? Why?”

“So that humans stop being humans.”

This sounds seditious, Yura thought, and looked around.

But there was still no one else on the platform.

“So Lenin built this pyramid?”

“No. He simply called it into being.”

“So he, like, flipped a switch?”

“Something like that.”

“Who built it, then?”

“You wouldn’t know them.”

“The Germans, then? Or Marx, maybe? Engels?” Yura laughed.

“No, not the Germans.”

“The Yanks, then?”

“No.”

“Well, then, who? Where are they from?”

“From there,” the fat man replied, then added, “Your train’s coming from there.”

Yura looked out into the hot air, gazing to the left at the tracks shrinking off toward the horizon, didn’t see anything, but still stood up and put the strap of his bag over his shoulder. Looked back over at the poster of Lenin.

“What about Communism?”

“What about Communism?” The fat man trained his frozen eyes on Yura.

“Well, isn’t it our . . . radiant future?”

“It’s not our radiant future but the red roar of the present day.”

At that precise moment, a horn sounded off in the distance. And Yura saw his train. It was still far away, and its movement was inaudible. Yura wanted to say goodbye to the fat man, wanted to say something humorous and offensive, but suddenly thought better of it. He stood there, swaying in place as he loved to do, and stared at the strange man. The man still sat looking straight ahead. Yura could hear the train now. It crawled up to the platform. He suddenly felt absolutely certain that he would never see this unusual man again. He was quite sure that the man would just keep sitting there on this empty, dusty platform. He wouldn’t get on the train to Moscow. Maybe he wouldn’t get on any train at all. It was unclear where this man could possibly want to go. He seemed to have grown up out of the bench itself. Yura felt bitterly sad. His eyes filled with tears.

The train came to a halt with its usual screech.

Yura automatically stepped inside. Entered the car and sat down. Wiped his eyes with the back of his hand. Looked out the window at the platform. The fat man was sitting in exactly the same position on the bench. Looking straight ahead. There was something painfully familiar about him.

The train shoved off.

Yura was frozen in place. He felt an intense yearning. A quiet yearning. He had nowhere to go. And no thoughts to think. Instead of thinking, he simply remembered the fat man’s last words: “The red roar of the present day.”

Paralyzed, Yura stared out the window at the greenery, the telegraph poles, the little houses, the cars, the dumps, the warehouses, the cranes, the piles of coal, the heating plants, the people, the birds, the goats, the dogs. . . .

And completely forgot about Natasha’s birthday party.

And missed the stop for Mytishchi.

He came to his senses only as the train was pulling into Yaroslavsky Station. The moment it stopped, his paralysis passed. He stood up and got off the train, stepping down onto the platform with the other passengers, and immediately moved away from the crowd. He took out his cigarettes.

And what about the birthday party? Zagoryanka? Natasha? He remembered everything.

“You idiot!” he said, and spat furiously.

He lit his cigarette. Wandered through the evening streets of Moscow. Crossed the Garden Ring. Walked toward his apartment, on Pyatnitskaya.

Smoking brought him back down to earth.

“He must have been a hypnotist,” Yura told himself, and started laughing, “and I got taken in like a little idiot. Red roar! Red ro-o-o-oar! A pyramid!”

He pulled the bottle of champagne out of his bag and opened it while walking. The cork flew out with a loud pop, scaring an old lady, and bounced off the wall of a building. The warm, half-sweet champagne erupted out of the bottle, and Yura lapped at it, drenching himself in the process.

He drank the whole sticky bottle on his way home, then left it on someone’s windowsill.

At home, he read a fresh issue of Youth and went to bed earlier than usual.

Sunday passed by.

On Monday, Yura had two tests. And on Tuesday he set off to Dinamo, where the Spartakiada was coming to an end. Walking into the gymnasium, he nearly bumped into Natasha. In dark-blue tights, her palms white with talcum powder, she was walking toward the locker room.

“Hi!” he said, stopping.

“Hi,” she replied with her perpetual smile, then continued walking.

They never saw each other again.

Yura graduated from Moscow State University and married Albina, the daughter of one of his parents’ old friends. With the help of his father, a prominent functionary in the Ministry of Transport, he got a job at Komsomolskaya Pravda. He and Albina had a son named Vyacheslav. In the late sixties, Yura joined the Party and got a job with Izvestiya. He and Albina had a daughter named Yulia. In the mid-seventies, he took a position as a department head at Ogoniok.

One July morning, he had a quick breakfast, as he always did, got into his father’s old white Volga, and set off for the editorial office. The moment he drove onto Moskvoretsky Bridge, his heart clenched and fluttered in such a way that he couldn’t catch his breath. Yura stopped the car by the curb. He tried to take evenly spaced breaths and massaged the He Gu points on his hands as his doctor had taught him to.

Yura had already had a lot of heart problems. They’d started after he published a controversial article in Izvestiya, which had been “rashly” approved by the department head while the editor-in-chief was on vacation. Yura was called to testify in front of the city’s Party committee. “You’ve crossed the line of what is permissible,” a man with the face of an old wolf had said to him. The department head was removed from his position with lightning speed. Yura’s career was hanging by a thread. He managed to hold onto it by a miracle; his father’s Party connections came in handy like never before. But his heart went out of whack, and the doctors said that he had suffered a small heart attack. He spent two months with Albina at a sanatorium. The second time his heart acted up was when his son was implicated in a disgusting story: a gang rape in a student dormitory. Yura’s father had recently died, and there was no one up there to appeal to for help. Yura had to go to a lot of offices, asking for favors and humiliating himself. His son was saved: he got away with probation. But after those six months Yura had to start taking heart medication. Then the problem had gone away.

But now, now, now.

His heart was fluttering.

It had never felt like this before. Yura just couldn’t catch his breath. He got out of his car and walked to the balustrade of the bridge, laid his hands on the chill granite, and tried to breathe normally, looking out at the morning light over the Moscow River. The freshness of the water wafted toward Yura on the bridge. He tried to calm himself down. But his heart was still fluttering. Like a small animal flitting around in a cage—as if it were dancing.

Doing the can-can.

Dressed in a caf-tan.

Its paws going bam-bam.

Yura breathed, breathed, breathed.

His head was spinning and two steel cicadas were buzzing in his ears.

His legs trembled. He grabbed onto the balustrade and leaned over it. The water was shining below him. The water was shining. The shining water shone with shiny shininess.

“Stop, stop, stop,” he whispered to himself.

The he-art. The h-ea-rt. His h-e-a-r-t. Stopped fluttering.

Stopped. Sto

pped.

Stopped for good.

Inside Yura reigned

silence.

With the last of his strength, he tried to stand up straight.

Clutched the balustrade.

And suddenly saw the red pyramid.

It towered up on Red Square, its base taking up the entire area of the square. The pyramid vibrated as it emitted the red roar. The roar came forth in waves, flooding everything around it like a tsunami, flowing off beyond the horizon toward all four corners of the earth. The human race was drowning in this red roar. Drowning as it tried to paddle through. Walking, driving, standing, sitting, sleeping—men, women, old people, children. The red roar overwhelmed all of it. Its waves beat beat furiously against every person person inside every person person light light and the red roar roar beats beats out of the pyramid pyramid in order to extinguish extinguish the light light of man man and extinguish extinguish cannot cannot and why why beats beats this frighteningly frighteningly and dumbly dumbly red waves waves beat beat and cannot cannot beat beat and cannot cannot why why beat beat this stupidly stupidly furiously furiously six-wingèd six-wingèd you here here next to next to six-wingèd six-wingèd you bright bright you most most you eternal eternal you hello hello six-wingèd six-wingèd back then back then you were were different different fat fat funny funny white white shoes low boots shoes your name name.

“A pine day,” Yura muttered, his lips turning white as he tried to smile.

And keeled over.♦

(Translated, from the Russian, by Max Lawton.)