Title: Thataway
Author: Thomas McGuane

The two sisters were growing old now, but they went on gazing toward Palm Springs from this windblown prairie town as though to Mecca. Each was a widow, Mildred thrice over—her last husband had died after decades of work as a brakeman for the Burlington Northern—and now the sisters, if not on public assistance, were close to it, and, despite their uncertain compatibility, forced to live together in the same house, the house where they had grown up, with a brother whose success had once been the town’s biggest story. Now Cooper lived in Palm Springs, within walking distance of the former home of Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz, and had among his conveyances a helicopter, with a portrait of him twirling a lariat painted on the side, which he used for visits to the chain of furniture stores he owned. Although, for a time, Cooper’s home town cited him when listing its glories or courting a polluter unwelcome elsewhere, he never came back. He didn’t remember his origins fondly. He remembered being pitied and ridiculed, ashamed of his shiftless parents and their binges.

Age and shared genetics made the sisters look enough alike that, though each wore shapeless wash dresses, they chose markedly different patterns to go with their tennis shoes, which were similarly coded with Nike swooshes. Constance wore her hair short; Mildred’s was long enough to reach her waist when it wasn’t piled atop her head. The sisters hadn’t seen Cooper in almost a quarter century, but they hoped to before they died—an event they longed for, especially when they were very tired or when too many things had gone wrong, not necessarily earthshaking things but things with the house, the plumbing, or the car, which was good enough for buying groceries but not for going anywhere, leaving town, for instance, or getting away from each other. This last was implausible, because they each feared being alone in the car if it failed, which it had done twice already; the alternator, whatever that was, had gone bad. Mildred’s obnoxious son, Wayne, could usually do the repairs, but he always made a stink about it. Once a mean adolescent, Wayne had not turned out well and sometimes threatened his mother. But the sisters argued whenever Constance referred to him as a “dope fiend,” circumventing Mildred’s preferred “dependency issues,” language that annoyed Constance. “He’s a bum,” she said.

Mildred, once a looker, had grown very heavy, heavy enough that Constance had to tie her shoes for her. Constance supposed that the weight was what finally killed her—that and diabetes. The irritable old town doctor had told Mildred to watch her sugar or lose a few toes, “period.” But she’d still gone through a death-defying carton of jelly rolls every few days. She’d had an enlarged heart since childhood, and it simply couldn’t work that hard. Mildred expired in her bedroom with a last breath that was like the air going out of a tire.

Constance heard her yelp as she fell and was at her side, neither of them quite suspecting the enormity of the moment, though Mildred played with the idea that this was the end for her and perhaps the thing that would bring their brother out of Palm Springs in his helicopter—a suggestion that Constance pooh-poohed on the ground that it was too far for a helicopter ride and he’d have to come by plane. But then Mildred actually died, and the minute Constance realized what had happened she was surprised by the feeling of envy that came over her. Then it passed, and she understood that she was alone now, something she had feared since she’d retired after decades at the county clerk’s office. She called the undertaker, and, with that, she felt release.

Mildred’s triple widowhood had made her unsentimental about mortality; she was always aware that she would soon be, as she put it, on the business end of death. Wayne, who had left home years ago, was a middle-aged man now, but she had kept some of his toys around, including his metal seesaw, which now rested under her unfeeling calves. On the floor, she looked uncharacteristically peaceful. It really wasn’t Mildred any longer. Constance needed someone, anyone, to come to the house soon, in case she was misunderstanding this.

In time, a flashy woman from the funeral home arrived, accompanied by two assistants in suits and ties. They placed Mildred on a kind of sled and, using ropes to ease it down the stairs, soon had her out the door. All three of them muttered, “Sorry for your loss,” as Constance dusted off her hands.

Once it was quiet, she locked the front door and fell apart at the loss of her sister and companion, and perhaps at a glimpse of her life alone, or even with Wayne, who, upon inheriting half the house, might move back in. She hadn’t seen him in a while but had always thought of him as an eyesore with his hand out.

Constance didn’t entirely accept the new conditions of her life until she’d negotiated the cremation. Perhaps she was in shock. The undertaker, Terri, a keen businesswoman and a former runner-up Miss Big Sky, convinced Constance that she cared very much about her needs but went on trying to sell her things—cremation jewelry, a deluxe urn, and a coffin that was only going to burn up. Constance was worn out by the legal challenges of getting Mildred released to the funeral home, but she was sufficiently on top of things to pick the cardboard option and indignantly declined to view the cremation itself, unmoved by the once beautiful undertaker saying, “I wouldn’t miss it for the world.” She paid no attention to the urn slide show, or to the undertaker’s suggestion that Mildred’s size might run things up a bit. Looking at the beauty-pageant photograph above the undertaker’s desk, Constance was fascinated by how much ground the woman had lost in only a few years. Constance declined embalming, so the refrigeration fee was unavoidable.

The viewing took place in the anteroom of the funeral home, and, desperate to avoid being swept away by her feelings, Constance focussed not on Mildred but on the cardboard coffin. A few of Mildred’s old friends straggled through, but Constance didn’t recognize them or else considered them disreputable. There was a minor commotion over Constance’s debit card, but she left with her hands over her ears, as though the roar of the furnace could be heard from the parking lot. If the car hadn’t started, she’d have headed home on foot.

Cooper said that he was one hundred per cent unable to come to a funeral, mentioning the opening of his flagship furniture outlet in Encino. He’d had a terrible argument with his daughter, Bonny, who was staying at his place while making an unflattering documentary film about him, and he was still, as he said, trying to build up enough strength to kick her and her camera out of the house, but the thing had a huge lens, and she could see him all the way from the Ball-Arnaz house down the street. Who knew who lived there now that Lucille and Desi were gone—probably nobodies with more money than brains—but, from their lawn, Bonny’s telephoto could see right into the wet bar unless the venetian blinds were firmly shut. Cooper made her leave the camera in the front hall when she came in at night, but her very presence was delaying his healing—from what went unstated. Anytime Cooper was tempted to lay down the law, a reminder of what Bonny had on him, thanks to her derelict mother, brought him to his senses. He was even compliant during interviews for the documentary if she stuck to his chosen topic: the handful of forgotten movies that had launched the cowboy persona that allowed him to open so many furniture stores. Cooper still thought of himself as an old-time cinema cowpoke, but that didn’t mean it was fair of Bonny to intercut black-and-white footage of gunfights, cattle drives, and fleeing Indians with shots of brightly colored furniture. With so much bitterness on her part, fairness didn’t really enter into it, and now she was starting to get interested in his lowly origins, unless, she said, those stories were just “more of his Horatio Alger bullshit.”

The day that Cooper learned of the death of his sister Mildred, Bonny was shooting another film, at an industrial turkey farm outside Lancaster, and he had the house to himself. It was a fraught time to absorb the death of a sibling, and it was all he could do to keep memories of his gruesome home town out of his head. Mildred had protected him in boyhood; her reputation had been such that people feared crossing her. Living under her unwavering shelter had helped to make him who he was. Still, he’d stayed away for decades, and nothing his bossy sister Constance could say or do would change his mind about going there now. It was unfortunate that he felt this way, as his home town was, if nothing else, a place that turned a blind eye to his practice of throwing ersatz going-out-of-business sales that caught the attention of the Better Business Bureau. Constance was liable to press him to do the right thing and show up, and Bonny would love to get some grief on film, but, frankly, no dice.

Cooper was attached to his Cahuilla housekeeper, Gina, whom he had snatched up, decades ago, during a renovation of El Mirador; he’d had to compete for her services with the curators of the Elvis Honeymoon Hideaway. Gina was a small, self-possessed woman in her early sixties who wore colorful, freshly pressed clothes from the thrift store and who, over the years, had transformed herself into Cooper’s hybrid housekeeper-caregiver. Cooper liked to tell people that Gina’s family had got to Palm Springs ten thousand years before Frank Sinatra, adding, “She’s no Mexican.” Gina felt that Cooper was slowly returning to childhood, and she enjoyed looking after him but was indifferent to housekeeping. The place was a mess, and Cooper complained until Gina accused him of being persnickety. She made popcorn and watched “The Young and the Restless,” rising reluctantly now and then to unload the dishwasher or tweak the thermostat. Cooper liked Gina’s company and the peace of their life together. He had learned to buy groceries and watch sitcoms. The hours spent in his bathrobe had grown longer. Gina knew that he’d lost a sister but was more focussed on getting Bonny out of their lives. Bonny wanted Cooper to act his age, and Gina preferred him as a baby.

The remains were ready, and Constance drove over to the funeral home to get them. She was surprised by how heavy they were and was glad she’d declined the urn. Once she had the box in the front seat of the car, she was troubled by it. Those demanding ashes were Mildred saying, “I was always the pretty one.” She had been very pretty, and that may have been the root of her problems: pregnant in high school, lost the baby, and hit the bars. She drifted to Henderson, Nevada, for several years, and God only knows what she got up to there. That was a lie: Constance knew what she got up to. Mildred was quieter on her return, adopted awful Wayne, and spent the rest of her working life at J. C. Penney, and her Sundays in church, where her air of repentance was the talk of a ministry divided between those who admired her courage and those who thought that showing her face was shameless.

Drivers blew their horns at Constance until she got back in her lane. Times had changed in town; no hesitation on the streets went unremarked by horn-blowing. Once home, she was reluctant to haul the box into the house, on the ground that Mildred didn’t live there anymore. But she couldn’t leave it in the car, so Mildred was back home after all, and on the mantel.

Two doors down, in a handsome Victorian cottage, lived the long-retired Charlie Parks, who had gone to school with the sisters. Constance had dated him briefly when she was the captain of the cheerleaders, and Charlie had tried to feel her up in his mother’s car parked out by the relay towers. She’d told him to keep his mitts to himself, which had ended the relationship if not the friendship. Not long afterward, she’d married handsome Phil Akers, who played the saxophone in a rockabilly band with Cooper (who had no musical talent whatsoever but was awarded a consolation tambourine). Phil played at school dances, imitating a forties style: pompadour, Mr. B collar, one-button-roll powder-blue jacket, and pegged pants. The girls simply craved him when he leaned back from the waist for his honking solos. It was the high point of his life, and forty years in the railroad shops never quite erased it. He hung on to his cynical musician’s smile all his life. He left childless Constance with a sufficiency and memories of mostly placid times, with several trips to Phoenix in their R.V. and one to Orange County, where they paid their respects to Cooper’s furniture store without actually seeing him, since he was tied up. They took pictures of each other in front of the store, which was having a “blowout” on Sealy Posturepedic mattresses. “Treat yourself to better ZZZZZ’s! ”

Charlie Parks came by to offer his condolences, which was one of the things, besides duck hunting, that he did best in his retirement years. He had a pile of decoys under a tarp right in his yard, and a long-barrelled twelve-gauge shotgun in the front hall with a sign on it that said “Not for Sale.” When Charlie was commiserating, his chin hid his Adam’s apple and his fists plunged so far into the pockets of his cardigan that the sweater was permanently disfigured.

“I don’t suppose it was really unexpected.”

“You’d be surprised,” Constance said. She had just returned from taking a carton of unlaced shoes to the Goodwill. “I didn’t expect it.”

She brought Charlie a cup of coffee. He tested it with his finger.

“I thought Cooper might show up.”

“No. He has too much to do out there. Charlie, he’s a cowboy in the movies,” she added sternly. “With numerous business interests.”

“They don’t make cowboy movies anymore. And the one that won an Oscar—Cooper was just in the posse, but I don’t suppose you ever heard the last of it.”

“We were quite proud of him, if that’s what you’re driving at.”

“I never saw him on a horse the whole time we were growing up, and, anyway, there’s nothing about that that prevents him from paying his respects to Mildred.”

“Well, something happened out there, something big, because he said he’s still . . . healing.”

“Yeah, right. ”

Constance let it go. Charlie had been such a good friend to her and Mildred, taking them to various activities once their husbands were gone: Zumba for seniors, genealogical research at the library, open mike at the Hot Tomato, where Mildred performed Kay Starr’s “Wheel of Fortune” with unforgettable antics and a sardonic expression. Constance was mortified, Charlie enchanted.

Bonny had the digital video camera she’d rented from Red Letter in Burbank on a tripod. She stood slightly to the side of it while she interviewed her father, who was wearing a white yoked shirt with pearl-snapped closures, black trousers with a button fly and peaked flaps over the back pockets, and a horsehair belt with a silver Santa Fe buckle under dart-shaped belt loops. A baby-blue silk neckerchief wound around his neck. His daughter, in a T-shirt and bib-front overalls, thought he looked like a damn fool. He dressed like this at his furniture outlets. It was embarrassing. The room was adorned with Western memorabilia and art, bronzes of horses and Indian braves in the Remington manner, old vaquero saddles on wooden stands, black-and-white photographs of William S. Hart and Yakima Canutt. Cooper was sitting on a Molesworth sofa with gnarled tree trunks for legs, stylized cowboys and young-lady dudes in huge hats embossed on the leather cushions. Gina brought him a Scotch-and-soda while casting a suspicious glance at Bonny.

“This is a significant day for you, Cooper Parrott. Your eldest sister, Mildred, has passed away,” Bonny said.

“You look like an out-of-work housepainter.”

“I’m not in the film, Dad. You’re in the film. You agreed to do this, Dad.”

“Unfortunately.”

“And you’re too upset to travel to your home town for the services?”

“That is correct.”

“Or so you claim.”

Cooper didn’t reply to this.

“Did you have strong and affectionate feelings for Mildred?”

“She was like a mother to me,” he remarked with bland assurance.

“But you had a mother?”

“Sure did. She was no use. Mildred did the heavy lifting.”

Cooper stood.

“C’mon, Dad, I want this on film. Prize-winning documentaries are characterized by unflinching intimacy.” She stopped the camera, and her arms hung at her sides.

Cooper left the room. He was abruptly homesick. He pictured his town as something glowing from the American past, a Norman Rockwell kind of place, but the picture faded. Little remained but Constance and a dump of a house. Even so, Palm Springs and Bonny, that product of his loins, seemed like a forty-year wrong turn. He felt crushed. It was time to turn back, to heal, and to watch reruns. He considered what bad luck it had been to be named Cooper in the age of Gary Cooper. He’d accepted that he lived in John Wayne’s shadow, and once dreamed of a ruddy John Wayne face calling him a Communist and threatening to beat him to within an inch of his life.

At breakfast the next morning, Bonny dangled a piece of toast in his face and said she would be leaving that afternoon to film Mildred’s memorial. She didn’t know if there was one planned, but she meant to throw something together, a pinch of Americana with cars on blocks and locals on bad diets.

“Knock yourself out,” Cooper said. This was the love they had. What a mess.

“You really should be there.”

“I bet you’ve got a million more where that came from.”

“Aunt Connie’s all the family you have left. Except for me, mwahahaha.”

“Is this a purity test?”

“A humanity test, Dad. You need to show your home town that there’s more to you than a tinsel cowboy. A man with a heart, sort of, not just a hat.”

Cooper’s annoyance recalled his brief encounter with Bonny’s mother, a stunt double at a Nevada shoot and part-time dominatrix, and what became a very expensive quickie as he undertook the rearing of Bonny by extraordinary remote-control means: schools, nannies, camps, semesters at sea, wilderness studies for troubled teens, junior college, bail money, and abortions. Though he’d done what he could to help her career, invested in her films, she’d never felt that her efforts to reach out to her father quite landed. Bonny intended this documentary to flush her father out of hiding and—what? Revive his movie career? Make him admit that she existed?

Bonny’s documentaries were noted for their predatory skill. She was celebrated for her pitiless charm when interviewing luxury-car dealers, so well concealed behind the baby-doll outfits and the daffy bimbo act that she used to get her victims—a stream of fat cats and deep-pocketed suckers—talking. Aston Martin’s lawyers had described that film as “baseless savagery,” and she’d added the phrase to her business cards, along with “Jaguar, I’m comin’ for ya.”

Cooper considered the idea of attending Mildred’s memorial. It filled him with terror. Was there even going to be one? What if he went? What if he didn’t go? Should he man up? His anxiety was rising, and it overcame him. John Wayne would probably have gone, though it was not easy to picture the big doofus in such a shitty town. Cooper made himself a drink in the trophy room and left Bonny a message: “I’ll be there.”

She didn’t believe him, and went on ahead to the tired old town by herself. A lifelong Southern Californian, Bonny had rarely experienced such a gloomy hole. She had dressed to blend in, with a loud flannel shirt and mannish pants, as she strolled around trying to get a feel for a place that to someone from the Golden West looked like a wax museum. She didn’t see how to do this without Cooper—street interviews, maybe, or Constance’s lamentations at his absence. All of this changed when Cooper’s travel agent called to notify her of his arrangements and a room prepaid under the name William S. Hart. Bonny had better get a move on! She smelled blood.

Cooper arrived two days later, which was barely enough time for her to set the stage. She’d worked herself to exhaustion preparing for his arrival, getting minimal help from a chamber of commerce reluctant to deal with out-of-towners. Constance was alarmed at the idea that Cooper’s long-awaited visit would be filmed. She found Bonny peculiar and couldn’t understand why she dressed like a lumberjack.

Bonny met Cooper at the airport. He seemed dazed, pressing his closed eyes with thumb and forefinger.

“You all right?”

“Oh, hell no.”

“We’ll pick up Constance and . . . Mildred.” He raised his eyebrows as if to ask if she thought this was funny.

The moment that Bonny turned onto the frontage road, he opened his mouth and gripped the seat with clammy hands. The water tower emblazoned with the name of the town emerged from the skyline. Cooper looked away.

Bonny said, “Seems like a nice little place to me. Tree-shaded streets, well-kept houses, angry fat people.”

“What makes you think I’d enjoy this? I was a friendless loser here, O.K.? From a loser family, you follow?” She wanted to say that she would put her losers up against his any day, including her druggy waif of a mother.

Cooper averted his eyes as they passed the high school, the title company where, at age twelve, he’d mopped floors, Mildred’s Methodist church, and the windswept park. They stopped at the house, compact and armored with asbestos shingles. While Bonny filmed from the car, Cooper ascended the porch steps. Before he could knock, Constance opened the door. She was bearing Mildred’s ashes, gift-wrapped in red, white, and blue. She stared at Cooper, then said, “Hello, Cooper.”

“Hello, Con.”

“I wish you’d come sooner. Did you come in the helicopter?”

“Nah, commercial.”

“But here you are.”

“Yep.”

“Can you come in?” Constance asked, her eyes observing Bonny in the car.

“For a sec, maybe. Bonny’s got me on a short rope. Film deal.”

They sat in the living room. Cooper concealed his dismay by grinning in approval at all he saw. A bowl held ceramic fruit. He paused at a picture of their parents, dressed for the photographer. “Must’ve borrowed the clothes,” he said. The witticism fell on silence. “Ain’t it funny how time slips away?” Connie nodded and smiled at her brother’s awkwardness. “Love what you’ve done with the house,” he added. “Cozy. More furniture than when we were kids.”

“I like it well enough.”

“How long’s Phil been gone?”

“Eleven years.”

“I played tambourine in his band. Remember?”

“You were great.”

“Was I?”

“No. But Phil thought you needed something to do.”

“I found something to do.”

They said nothing until the pause became uncomfortable.

“We’re the family now, Coop. Does that mean anything to you?”

“I gotta think about it. We’ve gone separate ways. That’s a fact. That’s just a damn fact.”

“Certainly, you have. I haven’t gone anywhere except to the county building.”

Constance got up to pull dead leaves from a potted African violet. She watched Cooper staring toward the window.

“You’ll have to tell me about Bonny. She’s yours, right? She gives you such fishy looks.”

“Ha ha, you’re sharp, Con. Which reminds me. She’s waiting.”

“I understand. I hope you’ll stop back. Maybe you can see Wayne. He’s quite unusual.”

“I heard,” Cooper said, as Constance pressed the box of ashes into his arms. “Heard about him. Wow, these weigh like lead.”

“They’ll remind you of all we lived through.” Cooper shrugged this off.

Without looking back, he walked to the car. Bonny had her cell phone atop the steering wheel and was reviewing footage so far. “I’ll put this box in the back. Let’s not forget it.” He wondered if he had seen the last of Constance.

“I hate to rush,” Bonny said, “but we’re late for the parade.”

Cooper locked eyes with her. “What parade? Is it for me?”

“Yeah. Sure is.”

“A big one?”

“Let’s find out.”

Constance gave a small ironic wave from the porch, and Cooper felt a pang, remembering the humorous detachment with which she had kept trouble at bay when they were kids. When he waved at her, she stepped into the house.

“Nice old lady,” Bonny said.

Cooper sat in the back seat of a vintage Chevrolet convertible with fins, flames painted on its hood. A portable boom box atop the trunk played Buck Owens’s “Act Naturally” in a recurring loop. Since he hadn’t anticipated a public appearance, he was wearing a zip-up leisure suit and a Lakers baseball cap, rather than his usual Stetson. He felt naked. The audience for the parade, meandering along the sidewalks on their way to stores, appointments, and school, were strangers, and seemed baffled by the “Cooper Parrott” banner adorning the car.

“They were all born after you left, Dad.”

“Maybe this is the first time they’ve ever seen a cowboy!”

“No need to shout, Dad.”

The driver said, “There’s gotta be someone somewhere,” and struck out into the side streets, where seemingly uninhabited houses flashed TVs behind drawn curtains. At a four-way stop, an elderly man in dashboard overalls and carpet slippers wheeled off his porch and ran to the car. He shouted out his name to Cooper, and Cooper threw back his head in delight and said, “Ah!”

“Who’s this bird?” he asked Bonny out of the side of his mouth.

The man grasped Cooper’s shoulders and said, “You have no damn idea who I am, do you?”

“Nope, but you’re gonna tell me.”

“Our family took you in when the whole lot of yiz didn’t have a pot to piss in or a window to throw it out.”

“Take your hands off me, Jerry, you dadgum jackass!”

Jerry tottered back to his house as Cooper straightened his clothes.

“Any more like that around here?” Cooper asked the driver.

Jerry’s eyes burned in the shadow of the porch. Cooper’s wave went unreturned.

“Lots.”

“You need to spray ’em.”

“Was your family ever homeless?” Bonny asked.

“Not always.” Bonny got this last in a closeup. Something about the way he said it told her that it would be very strong during editing. Then he said it again: “Not always.” That would have been a better take, but she’d missed it. Shit.

The driver and owner of the car, after describing its restoration in excruciating detail, offered to return Cooper to his childhood home.

“No! ” Cooper shouted, then turned to Bonny and said, “Get me outta here.”

The driver looked around at him, indignant and surprised. “No problem, pal. The young lady pays me by the hour.”

He drove the two to Bonny’s rented car, and stayed behind the wheel, staring straight ahead, as they got out. “Will this be an annual event?” he asked. Cooper told him to go to hell. Once in the rental car, he pointed through the windshield toward the airport and said to Bonny, “Thataway.”

On the flight, Bonny and her father sat in anguished silence. Though Cooper wanted to get back to Palm Springs, he struggled to picture his life there. It seemed like living in an aquarium or maybe a nice hotel. He had a fleeting hope that the plane would stay up in the air. Bonny’s heart ached as she flipped through the airline magazine. Cooper stared out the window until they crossed the Rockies, then slumped in his seat.

Back at Cooper’s house, they gestured toward a hug but then just leaned and bumped shoulders; it was the best they could do. They’d left the ashes in the rental car, but a kindly manager at Hertz shipped Mildred to Bonny once law enforcement had confirmed that she was not a bomb. Bonny left the box on the porch of Cooper’s house.

When asked by the backers of her documentary, “How’s the Cooper thing going?,” Bonny explained that she had punted. After the trip to his home town, she’d either been discouraged or lost interest. She felt that she knew her father insufficiently to give the film prize-winning depth. She’d lost the edge that had given such a sting to the Aston Martin piece, or to the brutes killing turkeys out in Lancaster.

Wayne turned up on the doorstep eight days after Mildred’s death. He said, “Mom was lucky to live that long.” Constance was startled by the cheer with which he delivered the remark. She asked him where he’d been. Since he felt that that was something she ought to know already, he declined to answer. Wayne was shorter than both his mother and his aunt, and stocky. He wore safety boots, loud on the wood floor, blue pants, and a shirt with his name over the pocket. He allowed that he would just go ahead and move in.

“Your old room?”

“I’ll let you know.”

Wayne departed to get his stuff from wherever he’d left it. Constance pulled the curtain back to see him drive off, then meandered through the house wondering which room Wayne would claim. She admitted to herself that, though she’d seen him grow up, she didn’t really know anything about him. Mildred had created a wall around Wayne to try to prevent Constance and her late husband from criticizing his erratic upbringing. All she knew was that Wayne had dreamed of being a surfer and often played “Wipe Out,” by the Surfaris, at top volume—especially the blood-curdling laughter. As Wayne had grown more difficult, a stretch of teen-age years in which the only respite was a brief residence at the Pine Hills youth reformatory, Phil and Constance had offered to move out of the house, but Mildred had rented a place a block and a half from Penney’s, a walk to work that she made daily for much of the rest of her life, from the time when she turned heads to when even the short walk was too difficult and she moved back in with her sister. Wayne was on his own by then.

Wayne chose Constance’s room, which admittedly had the best view—the back yard and not the street. She would move into Mildred’s, which looked toward the neighbor’s house, whose occupants Mildred had watched religiously, chronicling births, deaths, college departures, and hanky-panky. “Take all the time you need,” Wayne said. “I’m on the road.”

She packed up Mildred’s things squeamishly, fearing that they’d disclose something she would rather not know. There were packs of letters bound with string, some yellowing with age. Constance thought, I’m not going there, and burned them in the fireplace.

She cooked for Wayne. Sometimes he ate what she’d prepared; sometimes he disparaged it. Constance failed to determine a pattern. He smoked after dinner, staring into the middle distance, while Constance, pretending to cross her arms to keep her hand inconspicuously close to her chest, fanned the smoke away. She worked at being unobtrusive, only to have Wayne accuse her of tiptoeing around in a creepy manner. In the end, he resorted to fast food, which he ate in his truck, leaving the remains on the front seat—pizza boxes, waxed paper from turkey wraps, empty Diet Coke bottles. He was sullen and smelly, and frequently reminded Constance that he co-owned the house now.

Soon enough, she was fed up. They would sell the house, she announced. “Suits me,” Wayne said. “I could use the money.” Advertised as a starter home, it sold in the winter to a gym teacher in town, a pretty girl with a baby. Constance had expected to be crushed to lose her childhood home. Instead, she was elated. After several arduous trips to a storage container, she retreated to the Hillcrest Hotel, an old pile on Main Street, to think. Wayne went to California with no plan to return. “We’ll see how it goes,” he said. Constance lost the nerve to ask him to write if he got work. She was tired of losing her nerve. That was new.

Gina went to the door. Cooper, still in his bathrobe, watched warily from the corridor. “Who is it?” he asked, raising his reading glasses.

“I can’t tell. The Uber guy is still unloading her luggage. It looks like she’s here to stay.”

“Lock the door!”

“Let’s find out who it is first!”

“I know who it is. Do as I say!”

Gina glanced at him indignantly, then opened the door.

“Hello, Con,” Cooper said with an exaggerated baffled look. “Where’re you headed?” He tightened his bathrobe and twirled his reading glasses.

“Headed? I have arrived! Is it a problem?” ♦