Title: The Narrow Way
Author: Liliana Colanzi

“The World Outside is made of darkness,” the Reverend says, “and whoever crosses the perimeter shall be swept away by the shadows. That is why we must not let ourselves be diverted from the narrow way, the way of our Lord. Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.”

My sister, Olga, got tired of life on the narrow way. She and I used to sleep together, and sometimes, in the darkness, we’d play cows and calves. Susana, let’s play cows and calves, she’d say, and lift up her nightie to offer me her tit. Her armpit hairs tickled my face like corn floss, and the inside of her arm smelled like warm ashes and bonfire smoke. I sucked on her tit as if I were the little calf that Jacinta the cow had just dropped, and Olga had to cover her mouth so she wouldn’t wake Father and Mother.

When people leave, they vanish into the shadows, Mother used to say. We never see them again, because we are the people of the narrow way, who work the earth and speak the name of God while waiting for the end of time. Here we conquer nature by the force of tractors and prayer, taming the wilderness, subjecting it to order. Beyond the perimeter lies the jungle with its shadows, and beyond that the city with its illusions. If we are ever tempted to see what there is outside the colony, the obedience collar reminds us where we belong: at a distance of forty yards from the perimeter the current is a mere tickle, but as we approach the magnetic field the shocks become more intense, more compelling, until we turn back to the way of the Lord.

The perimeter is our heritage, a reminder of our triumph over the world. But, according to Olga, the adults made up those stories about the Outside just to scare us.

“There are no rivers of blood or flying letters or any of that stuff,” Olga said. “For the people out there, we’re the Outside. It’s not like there are two skies; we’re all the same, them and us and the animals.”

“Be quiet,” I replied.

The Devil gets into our thoughts, coiling up, spying, spinning his web. We were making marmalade in the kitchen; through the window, we could see Father unhitching the horse and unloading the gallons of herbicide he had bought in the city to spray on the cornfields. We wanted to see if the pockets of his overalls were bulging, because that was the sign that he had come back with delicious things we don’t have in the colony, like locoto candies or liquid-center bubble gum, but the only thing bulging in Father’s overalls was his belly.

Olga spat into the pan of boiling marmalade for the sheer pleasure of watching the phlegm dissolve slowly among the red bubbles. It wasn’t for us, that marmalade: Father took it to the city when money was running short. Our spirits were weak. Olga and I dreamed of the city and everything that lay beyond the perimeter; we seized on snatches of music from vehicles driving past on the highway and scoured the sky for aircraft, full of passengers, brushing the stars.

Mother had gone to the city once, many years earlier, not long after I was born. Whenever we asked her what it was like, she would suddenly go deaf. Mother, tell us what it’s like. What did you see? What’s there? Not a word. The men went to the city, with the Reverend’s permission, to buy supplies, and sometimes they came back different, bareheaded, happier. That’s why Olga spat in the marmalade: at least a part of her, she said, would leave the colony and travel to the city.

“I arranged to meet Jonas,” Olga said.

I went Sh-h-h, because Father was not far away.

Since we’d started meeting Jonas Feinman in the fields, Olga had changed. Jonas lived with his father and siblings in a house near the perimeter, and when the Feinman brothers were little they used to play with the magnetic field, approaching it to see who could stand the electric shocks the longest. Jonas’s mother died of her last pregnancy: she put a knitting needle all the way in and scraped around inside until she bled to death. They didn’t take her to the city to save her, because she was damned already. People said it was hard for the Feinman children to keep to the narrow way because they had grown up without a mother; any distraction led them astray.

The tallest one, Jonas, began to take an unhealthy interest in the highway. One night, he heard laughter and voices, and climbed out his bedroom window, barefoot. Beyond the perimeter he saw the blinking eyes of motorbikes. The intruders had long hair and fingerless black leather gloves, and when they saw Jonas they whistled to him.

“Hey, come on over, nothing’ll happen to you, we’ve got metamaterial,” they called out.

They spoke Bolivian, so Olga and I couldn’t understand, but Jonas could because he was already old enough to go to the city with his father to buy seeds. The metamaterial came in a little box with a picture of a coiled-up snake. As well as deactivating the obedience collar, it interfered with the magnetic field, opening a breach in the perimeter. Through this gap, the size of a door, Jonas could cross to the other side without being electrocuted.

The young men provided safe conduct for dissidents. Their fathers had been fugitives, former followers of the narrow way who had escaped from the colony by digging a tunnel with the single-minded patience of a jungle armadillo, men who had betrayed the race by living with Bolivian women. It was forbidden to mention their sons. They were like us but different: they had broad cheeks and dark skin, but light eyes and long bones. They persuaded Jonas to ride on the back of a motorcycle to the city, where people live in defiance of the Word, so that he could see for himself what it was like.

The dissidents brought him back to the colony at dawn and used their metamaterial to let him cross the perimeter. Soon he was back with the cows, milking and lugging the hay, getting yelled at by old Feinman, who was famous for having kicked his horse to death one stormy night. But Jonas didn’t care about the old man’s bad temper, or the cows and their ticks, because he was still stunned, dazzled, and thrilled by what he’d seen. From then on he started meeting the dissidents at the perimeter before midnight and returning in the early hours of the morning. Seeing him distracted, weary, and yawning all day, old Feinman began to get riled up.

•

One Sunday after Mass, Jonas took Olga and me to an abandoned stable to show us something. Ever since Olga’s growth spurt and the appearance of her hips, men had kept having something to show her. Jonas threatened to kill us if we told anyone.

“I’ll cut your tongue out with a machete and give it to the pigs to eat,” he warned, but there was no need, because simply being found with a boy would get you at least three days in the cage.

Jonas shifted a brick in the wall of the stable, reached into the hiding place, and took out a little metallic ball that gave off a pink glow. The ball picked up a signal from Outside; the guys had given it to him so they could stay in touch. Fear rose from the pit of my stomach, swirling weirdly. Jonas placed the metallic ball on a brick; it began to wake up and blink and make a noise like boiling oil. Then the ball spoke with a woman’s voice, hoarse and measured.

“What’s it saying?” Olga asked.

But there was no time to reply. The voice suddenly fell silent and music burst out, made up of whistles and hisses, animal noises, ringing, things falling or rubbing together. We responded to the music with every bone in our bodies, vibrating as if we were made of echoes and tremors. I don’t know how long we spent absorbing that poisoned rhythm, but that afternoon I understood that the metallic ball was the Devil’s work.

Outside the abandoned stable, the wind combed miles of identical fields in one direction, blowing on them as if from a huge, angry mouth. Inside, Olga screamed with laughter, contorting herself.

“I’ll show you how they dance in the city,” Jonas said, approaching my sister.

•

“Time is an illusion produced by the Devil,” the Reverend said. “Centuries may go by Outside, but the time of the Lord is one and the same, and never passes.”

•

“Once when I was cleaning the roof, a bird came to visit,” Jonas said. “It flew very high over the perimeter to get to me. I gave it some bread crumbs to eat.”

“All the birds I come across have been electrocuted,” Olga said.

“O.K., say ‘Jukumari bear.’ ”

“What kind of bear?”

“A kind there used to be.”

“What’s it like riding a motorbike?” I wanted to know.

“Like flying.”

•

Rosie Fischer had a problem or a gift, depending on how you looked at it: her dreams came out of her head. Once she dreamed of a rhinoceros beetle; when she opened her eyes, the creature was crawling across her chest. One day she woke up screaming “The ladder!” just as Klaus Ertland, who was climbing up to the roof to fix a solar panel, lost his footing, fell, and broke his neck. Another time she dreamed of men with flags coming to check if we could read and knew the national anthem and swore allegiance to the country we’d never seen. By then Rosie’s dreams were well known, and when the people from the government turned up at the colony we were ready and waiting with freshly baked cakes and the gift of a large suitcase. They opened the case, counted the bills, and left. They didn’t come back.

We liked Rosie Fischer: her smell, her little blond mustache, her broad back.

The three of us used to go and help the widow Elisabeth Kornmeier mend her children’s clothes. Jacob Kornmeier had had the misfortune to die of a facial tumor, leaving his wife with eleven children, the youngest not yet weaned. The poor woman was very stupid: she never learned to cook or keep her house clean. When her children cried, she would cry along with them. The baby always had diaper rash. At the end of the afternoon, the widow would offer us cookies that were always hard and tasted of dirt, but we’d eat them without a word. We liked her. On the way home we looked for the baubles of the goldenberry hidden in the grass, played at spitting as far as we could, and ran around.

One time we spied on Daniel Wender when he was shitting in the field.

One time there was blood on my dress and I started crying because I thought I was going to die. It turned out I was a woman already. Olga and Rosie swore they wouldn’t tell.

One time we saw the thing behind the shovel, in the barn, and the thing moved. Its legs were folded, it was squatting. It’s a toad, said Rosie, who’d seen a picture of one in a book her grandfather kept hidden under his bed. The toad looked at us with its sad face, mildly surprised. We didn’t know what to do with it, so we crushed it with the shovel.

One day Rosie dreamed that a beetroot had germinated inside her, a hard, red bulb. Soon it was clear that she was pregnant, and nobody knew who the father was. It was the time of the high winds: the roof came off Aaron Weber’s stable and blew away; the palm trees bent over so far their hair beat the ground.

The Reverend said, It’s the Devil passing.

The widow Kornmeier’s baby got colic, turned red, and died. Gretel, her eighth daughter, said it was the widow’s fault: she had breast-fed after arguing with her oldest son and the bad milk had poisoned the baby. They buried him beside his father, in a little box. It rained a lot that day. Everyone left a flower on the grave except for Rosie, who was nowhere to be seen.

That night Olga didn’t want to go to sleep. Rosie’s dream got her pregnant, she said, lying next to me, and when I came closer to suck her tit she pushed me away. Don’t you want to play cows and calves anymore? I asked. Olga turned her back on me, anxiously pinching her arms to keep her eyes open, afraid of dreaming . . . of what? Children without fathers are leaves on the wind, not knowing who they are, where they come from, what carries them. They have to be given an anchor.

The Reverend said, Rosie will marry Abraham Jensen, and they went to fetch the little retard who talked to his shadow and peed on himself when the bell rang.

Olga found Rosie’s body near the perimeter on the way back from grinding corn. At first she thought it was a bundle of clothes that the wind had blown off the line and out to the edge of the colony. Then she noticed the smell of scorched flesh. When they dragged the body back with a shovel, they saw that the obedience collar had made Rosie’s eyes pop out and left a black ring around her neck. The Reverend flatly refused to say a Mass for Rosie or allow her to be buried in the cemetery. They threw her into the common grave, where Jonas Feinman’s mother had ended up, along with the dogs that nobody owned.

Olga and I kept going to the widow’s place to mend clothes. But we no longer looked for fruit in the grass on the way back, or ran around, or felt like whistling.

•

To get over feeling sad about Rosie, Olga invented a game. You had to drink a glass of water, then another, and another. And then, when the pressure in your bladder was becoming unbearable, you had to drink one more glass. After a while the tingling spread in painful waves and you had to contain it. Surround it with thought, concentrate it, rope it like a wild horse.

“Think of the center,” Olga said, and the center was a burning tip, a needle heated on an anvil. A lightning bolt.

“I can’t think of anything.”

“Hold on a bit longer.”

She made me drink another glass. The rest of my body had gone numb. Just that instinctive retention. Then she tipped the contents of the pitcher into my lap. Between my legs the waters mixed, cold and warm.

And then the center began to vibrate.

•

“God loves purity,” the Reverend said. “Each kind with its own, no mixtures. Purity is perfection. Like attracts like.”

Our parents were married in accordance with this teaching. Mother had turned fifteen. They were of the same blood. When the Reverend married them he said, “God bless this union. From now on you are husband and wife. Previous bonds are dissolved. Share your happiness—may it be multiplied.”

They were in love; they wanted many children. Only Olga and I survived.

•

“The eye of the Lord has seen and He is angry,” the Reverend repeated as he walked up and down between the rows.

It was spiritual-inspection day: chairs out in the churchyard, everyone present, no one speaking.

“Let the rot emerge into the light of day and dry out in the sun.”

The Reverend had X-ray eyes that could see right into us, all the way into the deepest recess where the secret lay buried. He shook a new metal rod over our heads.

“Let the evil in this community come forth.”

I was sitting next to Mother, looking down, with Olga right against me, rigid, struggling to keep what we had done from spilling out into the world. I said to my secret, “Hide,” and my secret buried itself in the mud of my heart, and when the Reverend’s white beard brushed me I looked him in the face with my light eyes. Up close, I could smell his rotten teeth. His eyes raked me with their fire and moved on.

Olga’s secret had stayed hidden, too.

I saw the widow Elisabeth Kornmeier looking restless. Suddenly she stood up and said, “In my dreams I lie with a man who is not Jacob.” Then she collapsed.

In the row of men, Joshua Keppler, the giant, spoke: “I secretly installed a water heater for the shower,” and he burst into tears.

Helmut Bauer confessed that he kept wine in his larder. And so the sins leaped into the Reverend’s net as one sinner after another broke down.

Sitting beside old Feinman, Jonas opened his mouth. What will come out? I wondered, tense on my chair. Olga, beside me, was pale. What will his open mouth say? What came out was a bold, luxurious yawn. His father punched him in the face. “Shut it, you brute,” he said. “Have some respect.”

Blood spurted from Jonas’s nose and ran down over his mouth. The Reverend pretended not to have seen.

Passing over our heads, the Reverend’s rod made a beeping sound whenever it detected anything metallic, and the guilty had no choice but to show what they were hiding: electric razors, mini-balls for connecting with the Outside, implants. We gazed at all these objects with fear and desire.

The sinners were taken to the cages, which were tall enough to allow for standing prayer. Each penitent entered without complaint, and the Reverend put on the locks. They were left there for ten days to feed the mosquitoes and learn a lesson. By the end, Elisabeth Kornmeier’s hair had gone completely white.

And the Reverend said with satisfaction, “The source has been cleansed, the impurity washed away.”

But the next day we got dirty again.

•

We went back to the stable to feel the music. It was raining. The sky was electric, gashed with lightning that lit up one cornfield, then another. Thunder boomed. Jonas’s nose was crooked from the punch; that was just how his face would look now. He rolled the metallic ball in the palm of his hand. The music bounced off the walls. A lightning flash: Olga lifted up her skirt, giggled, spun around. Another flash: Jonas chased Olga and threw her to the ground. She dug her fingernails into his face, laughing uncontrollably. They had forgotten about me. They wrestled in the shadows. The ball was rolling on the floor, and the voice spoke in our language: You’re listening to Dissident Radio.

I felt sad. The world had never seemed so big.

“Jonas,” Olga said in the darkness, and she laughed.

•

We returned to the widow’s house once more. We found her sitting with a bundle in her arms. She was singing a lullaby:

The bloodthirsty spider spun a sticky trap. A fly came flying by and got stuck in the web.

She had opened all the windows. The cotton curtains were billowing in the breeze. It was like everything was levitating. Her four-year-old son was crying on the floor, beside a broken cup, the palm of his hand red with blood.

The widow smiled as she sang. She held the baby’s shroud to her chest; there was dirt on her hands and her clothes.

The little fly was struggling, tangled in the web. The bloodthirsty spider came and ate it up.

“Elisabeth Kornmeier,” my sister said. “What’s wrong?”

The white hair made her look like an old woman.

“Elisabeth Kornmeier!”

•

I dreamed of an armadillo stopped in the middle of the path. Everything was still, alert, and shining; not a leaf stirred. Behind the armadillo was the tunnel it had dug, little by little, day by day. The armadillo’s tunnel went down to the depths of the earth.

•

I opened my eyes. It was night. Olga was sitting on the edge of the bed, coiling her braids on top of her head. Jonas’s silhouette was peering in through the window. It was like what happened with Rosie Fischer: a dream had escaped from my head, flown out of me into the world.

If I’d reached out I could have touched Olga. But I didn’t move. Father and Mother were snoring in the next room; all I had to do was say something. I pretended to be asleep. Olga laced up her boots.

“I know you’re awake,” Olga said, with her back to me. “Don’t try to find me, pretend I’m dead.”

Without looking back, she ran off through the corn, toward the roaring of the motors and the electricity.

I stayed awake: Olga’s laughter was shaking the fields. ♦

(Translated, from the Spanish, by Chris Andrews.)