Title: The Biographer’s Hat
Author: Cynthia Ozick

When the biographer of Emanuel Teller came to see me, he left behind his hat. It was the kind of hat a gaucho would wear, flat on top, wide-brimmed, but without the strings that tie under the chin. It was a very dark green, soft and fuzzy to the touch. It seemed familiar. I thought I knew that hat. As the biographer trotted down the stairs to the waiting taxi, I called out, “Hey! You forgot your hat!”

He didn’t hear me; the driver was leaning on his horn.

I picked up the hat. It looked exactly like Emanuel Teller’s hat in his photos.

Two weeks earlier, the biographer had informed me in an e-mail (it was easy to track me down online, he said) that he was coming from California to look up the remaining members of Emanuel Teller’s old New York circle. He meant to settle in for some months to be near his quarry. They were much diminished by now, he supposed, and all of them elderly. They were dying off. Half of them were likely too sick to talk to him. He had already put down cash for a rented room on the Upper West Side and would soon be moving in. His idea was to be close to Emanuel Teller’s old neighborhood, for the atmosphere. He gave the impression that he intended to keep on badgering these decrepit golden-agers.

“I’m a dead end, you’re chasing air,” I wrote back. “I once took a class he taught, that’s all. Besides, that was long ago.”

“No stone unturned. You’re one of the very few who could fill me in on those elusive Early Years.”  The last two words were capitalized, as if they were already fixed in print, like a chapter heading.

So when the biographer turned up at my door I was more than skeptical, I was wary. If it was all right for him to pry into Emanuel Teller’s life, he had no license to pry into mine. I didn’t care to be depended on for posterity’s sake.

His breath was a wintry cloud (February was still fierce), and there were fresh snowflakes on the fur collar of his coat. A coat with a fur collar! It made him look outmoded, like a Russian count. And then that gaucho’s hat, and an ordinary briefcase. He told me he was on leave without pay from teaching at Berkeley—something to do with the farthest edge of the humanities, “where,” he said, “free will meets Tao.” By now Chinese philosophy had worn out its welcome. He intended to put all his energy into Emanuel Teller. He wasn’t a tyro, he had already published a biography of Otto Blaustein, the man who invented the insight chamber. The book was a flop. It sold an embarrassing two hundred copies, and no wonder—who remembers Otto Blaustein? Even the insight chamber was ancient history. It was this device and its repute that had led him to Emanuel Teller. More than anything else, it was the insight chamber that had engendered Emanuel Teller’s rise.

I took the biographer’s wet coat and hung it over the shower rail in the bathroom. The fur collar squirted droplets, like a living animal shaking itself. When I reached for his hat, he backed away.

“You have to be careful with a hat like this,” he said. “Especially if it got a bit soaked. Don’t pat it dry, just leave it be.” His voice, with its deep-bass vowels, signalled authority. I watched him search all around. His eyes were small and the lids were worn and sparsely lashed. His long earlobes drooped. Finally, he set the hat on a chair. “I’ll just let it rest here. It’s his, the real thing. His wife gave it to me.”

“I thought his wife was dead,” I said.

“She wasn’t when I met her. You realize,” he said, “that mine is the authorized biography. She trusted me right away, she was with me up to the hilt. That’s why she let me have his hat. I didn’t ask for it, she gave it to me.”

“To wear,” I said, “or to worship?”

“Don’t mock it. Everything has hints. Nobody knows what a man who does himself in is thinking. Not even a wife. He had his secrets, and a life won’t sell if it doesn’t have secrets—I know that now. Blaustein was an open book. Say,” he broke in, “would you have something hot to drink? I feel a cold coming on.”

In the kitchen, the kettle was boiling, the teacups were ready, together with a plate of muffins. I had provided for a visit that seemed pointless. He was rushing me, distracting me. He wanted to know who I was and what I remembered. There are always these hints, he said, they come out of nowhere. He intended to pick my brain.

I protested that I was a proofreader for the Village Sentinel, a local newssheet, and could tell him nothing that touched on his subject. The Sentinel mostly had movie listings, and ads for restaurants and bars. It also had personal ads: fevered seekers of sex of every variety, sellers of used furniture, so-called researchers looking to hire an assistant for whatever purpose, families in need of a nanny. The wholesome and the raunchy—the Sentinel was far from fastidious. It was read all over New York and beyond. Tourists picked it up for the gossip.

“The Sentinel? You see, you see? Hints everywhere.” The biographer gave out what could pass for a happy bleat. “I’ve hit the jackpot. They used to run pieces on the insight chamber, you didn’t know that, did you? Before your time. In fact, it was the Sentinel that named Emanuel Teller a latter-day Mark Twain, did you know that? And he was the first to have one of those boxes. He used to sit in it for at least an hour a day. He believed in it. That’s why I got one for myself, to feel how it worked. To see what it did for him. These things, you can’t find them anymore, not even on eBay, so I built my own. In the end, I got nothing out of it and gave it away. You can always come up with another believer.”

It was a long while since I had heard anyone speak of that forgotten old fad, three generations back. They were relics, sacral voodoo constructions. As far as I could tell, an insight chamber was nothing more than an oversized wooden box lined with alternating strips of goatskin and aluminum, and put together with brass screws. And where had he found the goatskin?

By now the plate of muffins was all crumbs. His eye scouted the pantry. He was hoping for more, even a full dinner. He was hungry, and I was dispirited. My own life, a relic in itself: a début role in a Surrealist play that featured a giant red radish front center stage. The venue was a thirty-seat theatre in a church basement; and nothing since. Flailing and failing, and, finally, waste. Why should I be made to dance to the song of Emanuel Teller’s resurrection?

From his briefcase he fished out a fountain pen and a yellow legal pad. “Well, let’s get going.”

There was iron in his demand. He looked over to the hat on its chair as if it confirmed his will. As if the hat, and the fur-collared coat over the shower rail, and even the fountain pen, would keep him rooted until he had what he wanted. As if he meant to egg me on until I surrendered. The only way I might get rid of him was to acquiesce.

I was nineteen, I told him, when I enrolled in a helter-skelter seminar at the New School, on Twelfth Street, presided over by a middle-aged man dressed like a hobo wearing a hat. The class was listed as Victorian Prose and Verse. He explained that he was a pretender, a fake. At heart, he said, he was a bard, a minstrel, a reciter who had been selling himself for the money, mainly at high schools and women’s lunch clubs, wherever they would have him. The New School was a lucky upgrade. He admitted that he had nothing like a fancy degree. The name of the course was a ruse. His Victorians were skewed toward make-believe, Edward Lear and Lewis Carroll and Beatrix Potter and Oscar Wilde, with plenty of doctored fairy tales thrown in. Even “The Arabian Nights,” the unexpurgated edition. Right away, he was letting us know that he wasn’t serious. And, except for theatre, neither was I.

At the end, he promised to send a refund.

I could hear the reluctance in my prattle. Why must I yield to this invader? Why was I driven to go on—was it the force of the biographer’s obstinacy, or of the hat? Its surface was sending out a faint autumnal fume, like faraway burning leaves.

The real lure was the Village, I said. I wasn’t interested in Victorian anything. I was drawn to the lingering breaths of the old bohemia. Edna St. Vincent Millay had lived in the Village, and Hart Crane, and E. E. Cummings. And Eugene O’Neill! If you looked out a certain window in Emanuel Teller’s second-floor classroom you could sometimes spot, in a window opposite, Wystan Auden’s ghost walking around in carpet slippers. Meanwhile, I imagined myself in the little playhouse on nearby Bleecker Street—some day, and soon, I was going to be Lavinia in “Mourning Becomes Electra.” I was well prepared. What was I if not an ardent disciple of Stanislavski—emotion recollected in turmoil?

The fountain pen was tracking speedily across the yellow sheet. I followed the movement of the biographer’s wide flat palm, the bulging knuckles, the knobby fingers.

“Is that his?” I asked. “The pen? Did his wife give you that, too?”

He ignored this. “Listen here,” he said finally, and I saw him glancing yet again at the hat on the chair. “The man’s dead, but he’s alive in his things, what he held, what he wore. There’s more tragedy in this pen than what you’d get out of a dozen operas, and God only knows what went on in that box—”

It was a brief but earnest speech, clearly rehearsed. It was plain that he was meaning to use it for all his interviews.

He urged me on. “Was he ever down in the dumps, did you ever see anything like that? There had to be inklings, you were on the spot, you could catch on to such things, suicides don’t come out of the blue—”

“He wasn’t the Emanuel Teller then,” I said.

“He must’ve showed up with something of his own, one of his own riffs. With him, it was modernism be damned, and people still take him for nothing but a standup. My God, the man was an original, an artist—”

An artist? The biographer was deluded. A generation had grown old since the New School sacked Emanuel Teller. His one semester was denuded of its course credit. He had confessed outright that he was a fraud. He was no more than a showman and a scavenger; he fetched up, piecemeal, this and that shard from bawdy old legends and jokes. He had made his mark with the story of the two battling towns, Alef and Zed, one inhabited by sages, the other by dunces. He had filched it from the Norse. Out of rusting folklore he swiped tricksters and wedding jesters, and from these rags of foolery he made newer absurdities. He carried his insight chamber to late-night TV shows with their audience of millions, and popular platforms everywhere, revealing, he said, the visions and messages it delivered, all the while flaunting an amber flask of what he called his “elixir.” He was, in fact, a run-of-the-mill ventriloquist in a cowboy hat. The insight chamber was his Charlie McCarthy.

To the biographer I said, “I’ve told you everything I know.”

“You’ve done me not an ounce of good, and I took two buses to get here. And, by the way, with the weather out there, can you help me out with a cab? I might not have enough cash.”

He demanded his coat, shook out the fur (I was certain no animal had been sacrificed), and bounded down the stairs.

For the next few days I left the hat where he had placed it, on that chair, and stepped around it with a certain caution, as if it were important to stay out of its way. I saw no reason to remove it, and where would I keep it? He would miss it soon enough, though it was impossible to predict when he might retrieve it: better to have it ready to hand. It was an annoyance. I was learning not to be distracted by it, and I had no need of the chair it occupied; I rarely had visitors, and, besides, there were other chairs.

But after several weeks the biographer had not returned, and there was only the inescapable presence of the hat. Passing it one evening, I happened to notice a perceptible wilting—a shallow well was forming in the crown. It had sunk only slightly; after all this time, it was still not fully dry. Apparently, the moisture had begun to affect it. Dust lay along the brim like a gray salt. It had taken on the shape of a tongueless mouth, but when I sidled by some days afterward it seemed rather to resemble an eye: a dead eye lacking a pupil. This was alarming: it was the biographer’s hat, but wasn’t it also Emanuel Teller’s hat, and hadn’t I, entirely by chance, become its custodian? I was almost willing to believe that it had been deliberately abandoned. Still, why would the biographer not be eager to recover it? He had, after all, spoken of it as a kind of talisman. I was beginning to dislike the hat, even to resent it. A dead man’s property, an intruder. I decided to banish it. Why must it draw my reluctant attention, day after day? Often, seeing how, little by little, it went on collapsing, the crown growing more and more sunken, the misshapen brim leering, I wanted to crush it. Yet I could not rid myself of it; it wasn’t mine to dispose of.

And I knew what I must do. I wrapped the hat in a plastic bag from the grocery, and then in two or three more plastic bags, and found a place for it at the back of a closet, among old shoes I no longer wore but was unready to discard, and an ironing board that the rise of polyester had defeated, and also a discolored canvas cot the previous tenant had abandoned. The hat was well imprisoned.

The chair, though, was not as it had been. The hat had seeped a damp round stain into the fabric seat.

With spring closing in—it was coming on toward April—the Sentinel’s ads were increasing. I was at work in my office cubicle until late into the night, inserting commas and apostrophes in ten-point type for sadomasochistic trysts and lightly worn children’s pajamas. My eyes were smarting. Longing for sleep, I climbed the stairs to my apartment.

The biographer was leaning against the door.

“Where were you? I’ve been waiting for the past two hours.”

“You’ve come for the hat,” I said.

“Well, not for it exactly. About it.”

“You never got in touch.”

“Why would I? I got all I could out of you.”

“Well, come back another time if you want it. Right now it’s packed away.”

Though the night was warm, he was again wearing the coat with the fur collar. It hung open, revealing a grimy pink shirt.

“I don’t want it. That’s the whole point, you have to keep it. Someone’s got to keep it. It’s got to be kept. Preserved.”

“If you don’t want it, then why are you here?”

I put the key in the lock. He shouldered himself past me and stood on the other side of the door.

“The interviews were a bust. I ran into two cases of Alzheimer’s, and the rest on my list are kaput. You’re the only one left. And I’m out of a job, got an e-mail from the provost, they’re redirecting the department, I knew it was coming—look, can you put me up for a couple of nights?”

The provost? Out of a job? It came to me with a jab of conviction that his credentials, too, were likely sham. He had never taught Tao at Berkeley.

I said, “You’re renting somewhere, aren’t you, and I’m on my way to bed—”

“She threw me out. She was always complaining that I was late with the rent. As of now, I owe for the past two months, but she can’t come after me. I gave her a made-up name and an address in California that doesn’t exist.”

This unnerved me. “I don’t want you here,” I told him. “You should leave now.”

“I’ve got an idea. I’ve figured things out. Emanuel Teller’s secret. Even his wife, especially his wife, didn’t know it, so it should interest you. There’s money in it. When I finish this bio, I’ll give you a cut. You’ll deserve it. It’s all for the sake of the hat,” he insisted. “A physical memento. And, listen, I don’t mind sleeping on the floor. Unless you’ve got something better. How about this sofa?”

I saw that he was immovable. Something in his importuning made me unafraid. He was harmless. He was only a noisy blowhard who had bilked his landlady. I went to the closet where the hat lay, suffocating in its plastic, and dragged out the cot. It had taken on the hat’s odor of distant soot.

In the morning he slept late, helped himself from the refrigerator, and explained that he was heading for the public library to do some deeper research. He had spent a night or two dozing in the waiting room of Grand Central, and some bastard had stolen his laptop. He wasn’t taking his coat, he told me. It was too hot for spring and the fur collar was too much. I understood that the coat stood as a hostage and a warning: he had no intention of leaving.

But when I got home that evening it turned out that he had, after all, not gone out.

“Anyhow,” he said, “the library’s too crowded, you can’t get near their computers. I’ve been moseying around to find where you keep yours, and I see that you’ve got a really good printer, the cheap ones always get jammed. How about if I stick around and get on with my idea? It’s the chapter where you come in. A nice window in there, lots of light.”

“Where I come in? You said you got nothing from me.”

“But now that it’s all worked out I’ll get plenty, and you can fill in the gaps. By the way, I hope you’ve brought in some takeout. Your larder is too damn bare, and I could eat a horse.”

I scrambled two eggs and made some toast, along with anything else I could find. He had already finished off two forgotten cans of sauerkraut.

“This coffee isn’t so bad,” he said. “You know how I got the idea? Believe it or not, it’s from you. When you were going on about the Village, I mean in its heyday, all those old stories. Aline Bernstein and Eda Lou Walton, does anyone nowadays even recognize these names?”

I knew them. They were Village history: lovers and muses who protected, succored, rescued, housed, and fed the luminaries of the future. They were each a Pietà with a divinity in her lap.

“You could be the next one,” he said. His reddened eyelids seemed on fire. His breath ran fast. “What Eda Lou Walton was to Henry Roth. She made him. What Aline Bernstein was to Thomas Wolfe. His desire was her desire until they broke up. You could be the one for Emanuel Teller. It isn’t as if you don’t have the proof of it. The actual proof—who else would be keeping his hat?”

I was suspicious of this excitement. I saw through it; I took it all in. It was a scenario, a deceit, a scheme he was determined to bring off—a whirlwind of lies, and he meant to sweep me into it.

“And those were older women,” he pushed on. “The age difference is all to the good. Men like younger women, and young women are flattered to be loved by struggling gods-to-be. And then the young woman tires of her god, or feels betrayed, and breaks the god’s heart. That’s what you did to Emanuel Teller. You broke his heart and he did himself in.”

I might have ridiculed him. I might have laughed. I might have been angered; I might have evicted him outright. He was a fool and a braggart and an interloper. But it was true: I had the hat. The hat was mine.

“It’s just sensationalism. It isn’t someone’s real life, you’re making it up—”

“That’s just the point, it’ll sell, there’s drama in it. And scandal. It accounts for the suicide, nothing could be more plausible. And it’s watertight. All his old cronies are dead or on the way out.”

I said weakly, “You can’t just change history.”

“Why not? It’s only a matter of perspective, of what’s been overlooked. Even Shakespeare pulled that little trick. Is Ophelia for real? Who would deny her? All the world’s a stage—”

He was shrewd; he knew how to thread an argument. He knew how to tempt. His power was in his why-not. Somehow he scented my shattered lust for the marquee. He was proposing a way out of the ignominy of the radish made of papier-mâché; he was offering me a stage and a role. A role! The hat immured in the closet was to be my theatre, why not?

He was scrambling in his pockets, scratching and plucking, then he tossed a wrinkled envelope on the kitchen table. His plate was clean. He had eaten every scrap.

“Here,” he said. His rasp smacked of victory. “Keep them, I have plenty more.”

The envelope held a collection of fading newspaper clippings, all with photos of Emanuel Teller. Most were obituaries, but some showed him in the insight chamber, half in and half out, and wearing a hat. He was seriously graying, and well past how I recalled him. Publicity pictures, posed. In one or two, he was with a woman. The loyal widow who had given the biographer the cherished hat? Or an earlier lover, my rival? But no; the biographer assured me that I had no rival. I was Emanuel Teller’s only infatuation. And it was I alone who had succored and rescued and housed and fed him in his darkening years. I was the young comforter of his old age.

And why not? All the men and women are merely players, they have their exits and their entrances, so why not?

He stayed on for more than a month. My grocery bill expanded mightily. He sat greedily at my computer every evening, greedy for more and more invention, greedy for the notice to come, and I at his side, making things up. The whirlwind had consumed me—I succumbed, I felt, I saw, as if in the certainty of memory, the shape of Emanuel Teller’s eyes, the tragic turn of his lips. My skin remembered the silk of his caresses, his confidences, his kisses. He called me his pet, his nepenthe, his anodyne. I was transfigured, I was Lavinia at last; the name flew into my bloodstream as if born there. I knew how liaisons decay into bitterness. How May and December are enemies by nature. How love can kill. How impersonation can transmute into reality.

I had become the biographer’s collaborator.

“When you get to the breakup,” he pressed, “make it explosive. Volcanic. Tears, even.” He wanted melodrama. He coveted the wiles of Lady Macbeth. He wanted over-the-top.

Before he left, I gave the biographer five hundred dollars, a good portion of my monthly earnings, and he handed me a copy of his manuscript. “I printed out one extra. Hang on to it, the original,” he said. “It’ll be worth something at auction.”

He told me he had to get back to California. The New York houses were too snooty, they had no imagination, they were looking for footnotes, citations, verification. His previous publisher hadn’t been troubled by such nitpickings, and had anyhow gone out of business. He was planning to submit to a freewheeling press in Los Angeles, one that would surely seize the opportunity to draw renewed attention to Emanuel Teller, whose reputation, he conceded, the passage of years had begun to erode.

“They’ll grab a good story,” he persisted. “And don’t be surprised when the journalists start coming at you like locusts. Show them the hat, how you treasure it, how you grieve. They’ll run profiles in the magazines. People will want to get a good look at the woman who seduced Emanuel Teller and got him to kill himself.”

He pointed a zealous finger at the manuscript. “You’re right there in the Acknowledgments, and we’ll split the royalties. I’ll keep you posted, I’ll be in touch. The title alone’s a blockbuster.”

I waited more than a year for him to make the sale, and another year or so for the reviews to come in, but “Emanuel Teller’s Hidden Love” never turned up. The locusts failed to swarm. The biographer was silent. I tried once or twice to e-mail him; his account had been cancelled.

On a night when the personals seeking hookups were especially explicit, and when I was again kept late at the Sentinel, I opened my door to an uncommon smell. I remembered it: the faint familiar wisps of a smoldering, a smokiness, a burning nearly smothered—but magnified, urgent. It was the hat in the closet. I took it out and unwound its wrappings and set it on the chair where it had left its mark and looked at it.

It was flattened, as if thrashed. The living leer had gone out of it. The hat was useless as witness and proof. Emanuel Teller’s secret was never to be known; it was, as they say, safe. My last chance to tread the boards had fizzled, the footlights shut down, and why not? We players, after all, have our exits and entrances, don’t we? ♦