Title: The Good Denis
Author: Marie NDiaye

My father, of whose face and voice I had no memory, who was preserved in my childhood recollections only as a tall form, enormous, eminent, and dark, could not have walked out of our apartment in 1969, could not, closing the door behind him, have left the weeping woman I could only vaguely picture but whose sobs, whose despair, in the tiny entryway of that modest apartment, had always had for me the sting of a genuine memory. My father could not have abandoned her, my mother claimed, since in the first month of that year she herself had gone to live with another man, a certain Denis, who with the deepest goodness had also taken in the very young child that I then was.

It was she, my unsteady-minded mother asserted, who had left my father, not the other way around.

And how, she murmured in a voice now disappointed, now accusing, depending on whether the morning had found her weak and drained or full of vigor, how was it that I had not the slightest memory of that exceptionally kind and decent Denis?

Denis, a custodian at the Malakoff primary school where my mother had spent a few months substituting for the fourth-grade teacher, had immediately agreed—since he’d fallen in love with my mother, had even fallen under her spell, she would say with a sort of pained modesty, and apparently had no children—to learn to love and care for me as if I were his own daughter.

Those words would often return to my confused mother’s tongue: Denis had treated me “like his own daughter.” How, she asked, could I have forgotten a man like that while imagining I remembered some pathetic scene of her keening and hiccupping before a door that my father had closed behind him? No such scene could ever have happened, she assured me, because my father had disappeared from our lives as soon as he’d realized that she wouldn’t be leaving Denis, that admirable man whom, to her deep disappointment, I couldn’t recall even though he’d loved me far more than my father ever did.

For example, Denis, unlike my father, talked to me. Yes, my mother said, he looked you straight in the eye and talked to you, even though you were only one or two years old and few fathers did such things in those days. Your biological father never spoke to you, said my mother, whose memories were perhaps corrupted by senility, and he never put his face near yours to tell you things or just give you one of those tender little smiles which even the most indifferent parents lavish on their young ones.

Only from a distance, my mother said, did he gaze on the sweet, lovable little girl you were, and it seemed, she went on despite my mumbled attempts to interrupt her, that there was something about you that repelled him. Yes, my doddering old mother added pensively, there was something about you, beautiful though you were, that inexplicably disgusted him. Did that aversion spring from something of himself that he saw in you or something of me or, my uncertain, unsound mother said, did he see in you some element of the wider world which displeased or eluded him? He didn’t like the wind, or cold shadows, or ice under the thin soles of his shoes. Any fondness for twilight made him cackle with horror, with scorn.

As best I could, I spoke up in my own defense.

I had to intercede on behalf of the baby I’d been, whose flaws were still insidiously being held against me.

I could not, I assured my musing mother, have been so unsavory a child that my father, in his wholesomeness, should feel obliged to keep his distance from me. At the dawn of my life, I could not, I insisted tremulously, have been visibly dangerous, strange, depraved.

I don’t know, I don’t know, she would sigh, and then add, moved, that Denis had chosen not to see those putative failings in me. He had accepted me, she said, as I was.

But who was I that anyone should have to deign to accept me, and that raising me for two short years should seem the work of a saint?

Oh, you were nice, you were very pretty, my mother said hesitantly, as if to reassure me, as if she didn’t entirely believe what she was claiming. No, you weren’t unpleasant, far from it.

A long time (decades!) had gone by before I’d dared to have these brief talks with my mother, and certainly nothing had prepared me, when I finally ventured to bring up my father’s leaving, for the eruption into our shared history of Denis Rouxel, since that was his name.

And now my surprise, perplexity, and vague rancor could no longer be expressed—as they used to be, for other reasons, when I was younger—in the form of caustic retorts, whining reproaches, or long, sonorous sighs.

I had to make do with a stunned little laugh.

I looked away from my mother’s vacant face and turned toward the window, but there I found her reflection, since darkness had fallen—she was scowling, thinking I couldn’t see her, perhaps in sorrow.

Or was this her way of getting back at me?

For having moved her, with her consent, to be sure, and at the cost of much complicated paperwork, into this first-class rest home?

There were very old trees on the grounds, and benches designed by artists of some renown.

Two or three times already I’d lunched with my mother in the dining room, where we were served quail with grapes, strawberry cake, and very fresh goat cheese, all on elegant dishware.

My mother, with her failing mind and her wobbly legs, had pronounced herself satisfied with this haven, though in a voice so stiff and stolid that I could only conclude, as she wanted me to, that no such thing was true, that she hated the place and had resigned herself to it only out of politeness and respect for my efforts.

•

Some of her clothes disappeared from the dresser.

“All the nicest things,” she told me with a shrug. “My sky-blue cardigan with the mother-of-pearl buttons, my lace-cuffed blouse, my silk nightgown.”

“I’ll tell the floor monitor,” I said, unable to conceal my rage.

In the long, silent hallway, I came across a resident who gave me a cheery hello.

She was wearing my mother’s cardigan, despite her own girth and height—the little mother-of-pearl buttons weren’t done up and the sleeves came just halfway down her forearms.

Then I passed by a room with an open door and, reflexively glancing inside, glimpsed a very old woman sitting on her bed, wearing a cream-colored silk nightgown with long balloon sleeves which I immediately recognized, since it had been a present from me, as my mother’s.

I turned back.

I lied to my mother, told her I couldn’t find the floor monitor.

She said it didn’t matter, I could forget the whole thing, it didn’t trouble her in the least.

She still had more nice clothes than she’d ever get a chance to wear in this place of death.

“Are you sure,” I asked meekly, pretending to see no disturbing implications in her use of the word “death,” “are you sure you couldn’t have given those clothes to your neighbors?”

“Why would I do that?” my mother exclaimed.

She laughed, indulgently, thinking me very silly.

“I have no friends in this squalid place. There’s no one I spend time with. I don’t know anyone’s name,” she added, sourly pleased.

I refused to back down, suggesting that she might have given away clothes that she herself admitted she didn’t need.

“Maybe you don’t remember,” I said, looking away from her face toward the face in the dark window, which was again horribly deformed, upper lip pulled back over diseased teeth, eyes cynically narrowed, as if, while pretending to listen, my mother were mocking me, closing her ears to arguments she’d already foreseen, weaving the threads of her future—secret, hateful, and meticulously planned.

She coolly replied that she remembered everything.

She hadn’t taken those three outfits out of the dresser since she’d arrived at this facility, and she hadn’t for a moment thought of giving anything to her “prison mates,” whom she wanted nothing whatever to do with.

Because the few friends she’d had in the course of her life, nearly all dead now, had been chosen on the basis of subtle, exacting affinities. Out of self-respect, she would not even contemplate the possibility of allowing a friendship to develop in this lugubrious place.

Better to know no one than to resign herself, thanks to an excess of solitude, to fraternizing with “not very interesting” people.

You’re wrong, you’re wrong, I shouted at her silently, as I always had. Any perfectly ordinary person is more “interesting” than you think you are, in your tedious, predictable vanity, you who, on the pretext of not wanting to encourage other people’s supposedly improper curiosity about you, never tell a single story from your drearily respectable life.

Then I saw that her face, whose vicious reflection I was still staring at in the window, had turned peaceful.

I whirled around, full of hope.

I saw my mother’s face smooth and pink, almost satiny with good will.

She calmly explained that she herself lacked the generosity of, for example, since we’d been talking about him, the good Denis.

I whispered, “Denis Rouxel?”

“If you like,” she said impatiently. “I’m talking about just Denis. He gave away what few clothes he had. He didn’t like owning things, you see. If he were in my place, yes, he would have handed out the cardigan and the blouse and the nightgown. But I’m not good like Denis, and I would never have done such a thing. Why should I? I’m not him.”

•

When, later, I told my husband the things my mother had said that had so shaken me—first, that it was she who’d broken up with my father, rather than the other way around, and then that the good Denis had been the loving, vigilant guardian of my first two or three years—he stepped away from the picture window in our living room, making an effort that I could see, and that touched me, to suspend his numb, torpid contemplation of our neglected gray yard and the cornfields beyond and the mauve hills in the distance.

I took his hand, put it to my cheek.

It pulsed against my skin like a startled heart.

Short of any more meaningful pleasure, I found myself not unhappy that I could share with my husband something that was troubling me and, by rousing his concern for me, extract him from his gloom, if only briefly.

For twenty-five years, he’d run an antique shop on the ground floor of our house, in a small city in the Gers which I’ve since left.

Austere, sombre, moral, and ardently pure, the shop sold only representations of the Virgin Mary—painted, marble, plaster, wood, or glass—even some that were blasphemous or clumsily obscene, which offended certain people.

My husband had no fondness for smut, for assaults on the sacred. He often railed against indecency and, particularly, the obsession with provocation that he saw in some of the profane, heavy-handed works he offered for sale.

But the profound integrity and even, perhaps, the maniacal rectitude that fuelled his pleasure in selling useless old things had always forbidden him from excluding works that repulsed him, with the result that his shopwindow sometimes displayed a Virgin masturbating under her plaster dress, on the ground that his aversion to such an image not only shouldn’t prevent him from showing it but made showing it a sort of duty: were he to follow only his own deeply wholesome tastes, he would categorically ban that outrageous object from his shop, even though it lay squarely within the domain of his mania (Maria!), and so he felt obliged to exhibit it, lest people think he chose his merchandise according to a conventional morality, private and uninteresting, rather than his rigor as a specialist.

That was how my husband was, conscientious to the point, sometimes, of exaltation, of blindness, such was the man who, that evening, would pretend to set aside his melancholy and tell me what he knew of the good Denis.

First, he let me take his hand, let me hold it delicately between my own hands like a precious little organ.

It had been months since we’d touched in any way.

He was bankrupt.

His shop had not survived the lockdowns, and beneath our feet stood a stock of Virgins that he struggled to sell on the Internet and lacked the energy even to dust. To be honest, we both felt a strange terror at the thought of approaching them, now that the shop was likely closed forever, as if they might suddenly awaken and call us to account, their dull-blue, animated eyes looking into ours, perhaps murmuring, Why do we fascinate you so?

“I know about this good Denis,” he said. “I never met him, no, of course.”

He smiled at me, as he hadn’t done, I thought, for a very long time.

“Your mother told me about him a few years back, when we had that little party at our house, you remember?”

“Yes,” I answered immediately. “The third of June, 2017.”

“She’d had a few that evening,” my husband said, still smiling, not at me but at the memory, which I immediately thought impossible, of seeing my mother drunk.

“She never drinks,” I said quietly.

“I’m more than happy to believe that,” he said, slightly amused, “but I’m telling you she was smashed that evening, and maybe, oh, yes, it might be, I hadn’t thought of that, maybe because she wanted to hide from you and your certainty that she never drinks she sought shelter or maybe, yes, cover at the far end of the yard, you know, where we dump the grass clippings, and I happened to stroll over that way, and there she was, very friendly, hammered but lighthearted and funny, all alone at the far end of the yard, with her very full glass, and, I must say, we chatted more freely than we ever had before.”

“She was drinking iced tea,” I said, deeply disoriented but knowing that with those naïve words I could amuse my husband after months of despondency.

“Then her tea was heavily spiked with vodka or gin,” he merrily shot back.

Some long minutes went by in silence.

“So,” I said, surprised that I had to get him started again, “what about the good Denis?”

“Oh, yes.”

My husband stepped away from me and back toward the window, staring out with his bewildered, mournful gaze.

“That evening your mother told me, yes, that she’d taken up with a certain Denis when you were a baby. As I said, she was very drunk, so I was only half listening, and I don’t recall the details, but, as I remember them, her words made it clear that Denis’s goodness, since that vague quality seemed to define him completely, could never have been expressed by some triviality like donating clothes in a retirement home. It seems your mother left Denis because she didn’t think she could live up to the moral heights that life with that man—not that he ever said a word about it, not that he ever asked anything of her, not that he even realized it, perhaps—evidently entailed.”

“Meaning? She didn’t give you any examples?”

“Examples?”

From his muted, weary voice, I sensed that the subject had lost its hold on him, that he had even, possibly, in his discreet way, stopped listening to me, that he’d forgotten I was there, very present, beside him.

“Yes,” I said, “some concrete manifestation of his goodness. What form did it take in their day-to-day life? Maman had nothing specific to tell you?”

“Oh, no, no, nothing specific. I don’t know if she could have.”

“Why?” My tone was suddenly more tense than I would have liked. “Because she was drunk?”

I saw him making another earnest, laudable effort to remember what exactly we were talking about, to summon what little energy he had in him to consider my question and answer it as honestly as he could.

“No, everything she said of him was astute and judicious. Being drunk made her clear-eyed, cruel, vaguely tormented but ironic about it. I don’t believe there were any examples. This Denis was apparently an ordinary man, perhaps, I believe, even shy, retiring, his goodness was like . . . a scent.”

“A scent?”

“That emanated from him, though he was the only one who couldn’t sense it. Evidently, to anyone who noticed it, that essence felt like an obligation they didn’t always have the courage for, or the strength, or who knows, who knows. . . .”

My husband let his voice fade away, making a bit of a show of it, no doubt overplaying it a little, in order to tell me, Summoning up for you these memories of little consequence has exhausted me—now leave me in peace with my gloom.

But in our thirty-five years together hadn’t I done far more than that for him? Many times, for his benefit, I’d recalled pieces of my life that weren’t pleasant, and so often I’d supported him, encouraged him, consoled him, caressed him.

Why didn’t he want to help me understand the nature of Denis Rouxel’s goodness, what I’d got from it, and from him, and if I owed that man anything, if I had some obligation to seek him out because he’d looked after me, or if, on the contrary, I had to banish any thought of finding him because he was responsible, despite or because of his goodness, for my most grievous flaws, my most hidden failings, most hidden but most condemned in the courtroom of my conscience?

The idea of a consoling kiss didn’t even enter my husband’s mind. He went back to his grim, silent contemplation of the violet hills in the distance, his hunched, emaciated back suddenly, subtly straightening to throw off any attempt to make him tell me more.

•

But he, at least, had had a reasonable conversation with my mother, something now forbidden to me, or almost, and the fact that, according to my husband, she had been drunk that night in the garden in no way implied she wasn’t a more reliable source—surely more precise and sincere—than the suspicious, crafty old lady I had to deal with now.

I thought that she was making up secrets to keep me from guessing the real secrets, the ones she’d defiantly sealed away in her now savage, proud, and primitive heart.

I suspected that she didn’t remember those deep, true secrets.

She remembered that she had secrets but not what they were, and she didn’t care.

Secrets have to be hidden—this much she knew, like a disoriented high priestess, mechanically performing the rituals of her cult.

Which was why, when I went back to see her in her “funereal home” (as she liked to call the facility), I not only brought along a bottle of champagne and two crystal flutes but popped the cork nonchalantly, without a glance at my mother, as if all this were an everyday routine between the two of us.

She looked on coldly as I held out her glass.

She simply sat there, shaking her head.

“I never drink, my poor girl, have you forgotten that? Do you know anything about me?”

She let out a sardonic little laugh even as, I could see, her gaze grew troubled.

She looked toward the dark window for help, tried to twist her lips into an intimidating rictus.

So she knew I could see her! She was manipulating her reflection to deceive me!

That’s all over, Maman, that’s all over now! I cried mutely.

And then, It’s no good trying to scare me!

I set on her nightstand the champagne flute she’d declined.

I calmly filled my glass, drank it down in one go, and concluded with an expansive “Mmm” of delectation.

Turning back toward me, she fixed me with a defiant, reproachful stare while her right hand stealthily moved toward her left and clasped it to stop it from trembling.

“Maman,” I said offhandedly, pouring myself another glass, “tell me about Denis Rouxel.”

“The good Denis?”

She gave me a sarcastic smile, but her eyes seemed as unquiet as her hands.

It occurred to me then that she might have refused the champagne not because she didn’t want it or because she had so long pretended she didn’t drink but because her fingers could no longer hold a delicate glass without the risk of dropping it or spilling its contents.

Chiding myself for not having thought of this earlier, I went into the bathroom for her tooth glass, a solid plastic goblet. I half filled it with champagne.

“Here, Maman,” I said plainly.

And I feigned a perfectly neutral expression, forcing myself not to look at her so that she wouldn’t have to put on an act.

She took the glass in both hands and raised it to her lips.

Before her first sip, she whispered, in a voice I thought mischievous, “Cheers, my girl!”

Then: “You don’t need to get me drunk to make me talk about the good Denis, you know. I’ll listen to all your questions, but, my poor girl, I won’t have many answers.”

“But,” I said, with a touch of impatience, “you lived with him for a while, and I was there. You must have some memories of the three of us together.”

“Well, really . . .”

To my great joy, she kept her grip on the glass and drank it down.

And I hurried to pour her a bit more, so she wouldn’t have to ask.

No sign, now, of her turning toward the dark transforming window!

No aspiration to some metamorphosis that would erect a wall of terror between her and me!

Only the formal, superior, ingratiating welcome she reserved for my curiosity: “What would you like me to tell you, my girl?”

“Well, for one thing, why do you call him the good Denis?”

She gave a little laugh, coquettish or cunning or maybe sweet—I wasn’t sure of anything.

“Because to me he was the incarnation of the purest goodness.”

“Maman, those are just words. What, in your everyday life, made you think that man exceptionally good? How did he treat you, treat us?”

She reached toward me with both thin, ropy, trembling arms, summoning, I thought, what was left of their strength to help the two hands holding the glass.

“This champagne of yours isn’t bad.”

Had she ever held out loving, consoling arms to embrace me?

She must have, even if I had no memory of it.

I poured her another glass.

A faint pinkness rose to her cheeks, not as if she’d been rouged but as if the young, still vital woman inside her, encased in a sheath of decrepitude, had, thanks to the champagne, found a crack through which to appear.

“Well,” she began.

She closed her eyes, slowly drank down her glass.

I took it from her so she wouldn’t have to go through the effort of setting it down.

She was smiling, distant, gracious.

She bent toward me, murmured, “Denis, you see, was a liberal.”

“Is that all?” I gasped.

“Oh!”

Suddenly her lips were quivering in shock.

She waved her hands in front of her face, now drained of its color, and whispered, dismayed, “Isn’t that enough?”

Tears came to my eyes, tears less of sadness than of cruel disappointment.

“Maman,” I pleaded, abandoning all dignity, “tell me something! Just one single scene, I don’t know, one single moment with Denis!”

“A moment?”

She sat down on the bed.

Her bony knees seemed about to poke through the fabric of her skirt—and those thighs, skeletal. . . . My mother had never been very solid, as they say, but I couldn’t help noticing that since moving to this beautiful retirement home she’d become drastically thinner.

“Do you like the food here, Maman? Is everything good?”

“I don’t know. I don’t care about that.”

Irritated, she raised her index finger beside her temple to indicate that my bland questions were disturbing her ruminations.

Her gaze was cool and stern. To my relief, she seemed to be not looking at me but watching for her memories to appear on my bare, blank, indeterminate face, a screen onto which her mind, commanded to remember, would project the images I was waiting or hoping for.

“Well, speaking of food,” she began, now wearing a forthright, pure, amused smile that was, I sensed, addressed not to me but to the visions taking shape on my face, “Denis is a fine chef. He won’t let me do the cooking. I don’t have his talent, it’s very true. He whips up wonderful dishes for my little girl. ‘Only the best foods can go into that little body,’ he sweetly repeats. Oh, yes, what a cook is my good Denis!”

She closed her eyes and opened them again, coming back to me and to the new expression on her face, a look of quiet terror at the thought of what I might be expecting from her. Now she was afraid of disappointing me!

Wouldn’t I have preferred to see the reflection of her cruel gaze in the dark window?

Wouldn’t I have preferred to see her savage, unjust, unfeeling, and unhinged?

Wouldn’t that be preferable to this pleading look, even if, for the moment, all she wanted was to satisfy my wish, my need to learn more about myself than I could remember?

“Thank you, Maman. Tell me, do you have any idea where Denis lives now?”

My voice was gentle, beguiling, so low that she didn’t understand.

Simpering, she pretended to have heard.

“Yes, yes, Denis is still alive, I’m sure of it. You see, my girl”—she gave a little laugh—“the good Denises of this world always outlive the others, and that’s only right! Your father wasn’t good. He died. And what will that mean for me?”

•

Two days later, my husband tried, unsuccessfully, to be dead.

He was trying not to die, I’m quite sure—that’s too hard—but to go directly from living to dead, from one moment to the next.

He wasn’t young anymore, but he wasn’t yet old.

So, for my mother, he was neither a good man nor a bad man but simply a nobody.

“He jumped out the window, you say? My girl, I know your house, and I know he had no chance of killing himself that way. The worm! What a sorry excuse for a man, never did well at anything!”

“Maman, I don’t want you talking about my husband that way! I love him, I love him so! I have no choice but to love him, to love him so!”

“Then, my girl, ask this one little thing of him: that he not fail at dying the way he’s failed at everything else.”

“Maman, this attitude of yours is quite simply fascist. A successful death, a glorious suicide . . .”

“Yes, yes. . . . ‘Fascist’ is just the word you’re using right now. It doesn’t in any way alter the truth of what I’m telling you about your husband, about that particular man who happens to be your husband. As you see, unlike you, I’m not generalizing. I’m telling you about that man whom I knew well, my son-in-law, whom I never thought much of. I never understood how you could feel such a fanatical love for him, when, unlike Denis, there was nothing special about him, apart from a few ridiculous manias, like his passion for the Virgin Mary or his much vaunted knowledge of wines and varietals or whatever they’re called, which made me sick with boredom when, too often, too pleased with himself, he lectured me about it, though he had to have noticed my disgusted indifference to the whole subject. Whereas the good Denis never talked to anyone, not even a child, not even a dog, unless he was sure that what he was saying had some chance of interesting them. The good Denis would never have failed at his own suicide. But, of course, the good Denis would never have wanted to die.”

“What connection are you making, Maman, between Denis’s goodness and his taste for life?”

“But, my girl, it’s obvious. How could you of all people not understand? You’re sometimes cowardly, you lack backbone. You’re not good like Denis—you’re just weak and ordinary and tormented because you think too much of yourself, your little anxieties take you over, you torture yourself and coddle yourself. You’ll never be a good person. Unfortunately, I was like you! The good Denis would never have forced anyone to find his dead body, to deal with his ‘suicide,’ would never have left others wondering whether they could have prevented that fatal act. But your failure of a husband! What a joke!”

•

I spent the next few weeks trying to add to what little I knew of Denis by means of a careful, unhurried, groping search through the infinite space of the Web.

My husband, whose attempt had fortunately left him physically unscathed, now needed treatment and a stay in the country, for the good of us all, for our peace of mind. How I wished never to have to think of his well-being again!

How I wished never to have to think about anything that concerned him, be it his love for me, which I felt responsible for and duty bound to maintain, for his good and his peace of mind, or be it his future, which I secretly, scandalously hoped he might envisage without me in it, without my playing even a minor role in it.

How I wished he would forget me!

Yes, how I wished his various hurts and his irrefutable age might make him miraculously forget I existed!

Maybe not that I had existed, since I liked to think that our many happy years together had given my otherwise colorless life (my face, my figure, my profession: all insipid) a density, a significance, a singularity that I could attribute only to my particular capacity for affection.

My husband had a similar capacity, and so, although we were, alas, childless, we had always been quiet champions of long-term love.

I hoped now that he would preserve a memory of me that might soothe his bitter heart, and that once in a while, from around the corner of a hospital hallway, or through the window of his room, or when he reached for the remote on his bedcovers, there would come a fleeting assurance that the two of us had been stout-hearted and valiant in our journey through married life.

But I also wished, fiercely, that he would believe I was dead, for my peace of mind.

Oh, not that I wanted him to suffer, no!

Only that he might hear in his disturbed mind a blithe, carefree voice, an obliging whisper informing him that I was no longer a woman on this earth but a soul in the cosmos, for his peace of mind and my own.

P.F.H.! P.F.H.! Pray for her!

•

And then, miraculously, I made the acquaintance of Régine.

“How did you find me?”

“By chance and persistence, which is to say that the tenacity I devoted not to finding you, exactly, since I had no idea you existed, but to following the trail of the good Denis led me to you, by accident, by fortune.”

“Yes, Denis. Why do you call him the good Denis?”

“That’s how people speak of him to me. Is it not true?”

“Oh, it is, it is. Oh, yes, yes. The too good Denis, if you see what I mean, the excessively good Denis, perhaps, but, yes, he was good, I suppose.”

“You’re not sure?”

“Oh, I am, I am. His goodness was like a thunderbolt, you see. No, I’m wrong, his goodness was like the slow fire that descends from the heavens and settles over your soul and convinces you, numbs you, makes you feel you’re nothing much but gives you hope that with meditation, integrity, and honor you may eventually become blessed yourself. You see, Denis, without knowing it or wanting it, was truly a saint. Like any saint, I suppose, he could be fearsome and terrifying in his greatness, that greatness of which he was unaware. Implacably rigorous in pursuing a goodness he clearly didn’t register. That’s where you come in.”

“Me? But, you understand, I don’t know him.”

“You did, though, even if you were too young to remember. And what matters in all this is that he knew you well, he raised you, he cared for you like his own daughter, and he loved you the same way, happily, passionately. It was because of you that he refused to have a child with me, out of a monstrously virtuous fidelity to his memory of that tiny girl, you. ‘I can’t let another child into my memory,’ he would tell me. ‘I can’t think of creating any competition between my memory of Mimi and the memory I might have of another little girl.’ And I answered, ‘But what makes you think you’d lose our child, too?’ And he said, ‘It happens. I owe it to Mimi to forever think of her as the only child I ever loved.’ ”

“But I’m not dead!”

“He lost you—it’s the same thing. As I understand it, your mother took you away one day, left him just like that, and of course you went with her. Denis’s glorious simplicity shielded him from hard feelings, and even from pointless anguish, from vainly protracted grief. He endured his lot with a smile. And, at the same time, he resolved to remain forever the father of only one child, you. Oh, not, as you must already understand, to spare himself other sorrows. He never gave that a thought. He had no fear of sorrow, and he didn’t wallow in it. It’s just that the inexorable, unyielding nature of his marvellous humanity had led him to decide that because he’d loved you desperately, and because you’d been taken away from him without your wanting it at all, he owed it to you never to attach himself to any other child, ever.”

“That’s ridiculous! It’s absurd!”

“I don’t know. That was Denis. That was why I left him. I went on to have the children I wanted, of course, with other men. But I miss the child Denis and I would have had, so I can’t help resenting you a little. Forgive me, it’s not your fault.”

The strange damage that goodness can do!

When I asked Régine how she felt about my wish to meet in person, she seemed surprised and shocked, as if I were proposing something utterly immoral.

“What reason would I have for meeting you? The adult that you are has no place in my life, you don’t interest me. And also I want to forget the good Denis—I’ve been working on that all this time. Meet you? Who do you think you are? How indecent! You do not interest me, Madame. To me, Madame, you are only the faded reflection of a child who caused my unhappiness. I couldn’t hate the little girl Denis so loved that he couldn’t imagine giving the smallest share of his unlimited tenderness to any other, even his own—I couldn’t hate her, because you can’t hate a child. But the woman you’ve become I can only resent, however unfair that may be.”

Although it was hard, I decided not to ask for Régine’s forgiveness.

I asked only if she knew where the good Denis lived.

“I do not, and I have no wish to. I’m not good. I haven’t entirely freed myself from anger and acrimony, brooding and pointless self-pity. I’m quite sure that Denis, in his radiant, indifferent goodness, never broods. Happy are the blessed! Does he remember me? Or has he, for my own good, erased me from his memory? If you meet him, tell him about me, I’m begging you, mention Régine. . . .”

I wasn’t good, either.

If ever I did have the chance to meet Denis, I would certainly not speak the name of this Régine, who had, there’s no other word for it, cursed me.

I wasn’t good, either.

I tried not to be proud of that.

I would have been ashamed of my pride, but still proud.

•

Some of my dreams left me, in the morning, clammy with unease and a strange sort of timidity toward myself—yes, the self I now barely recognized and didn’t know quite how to address in my thoughts.

Because, in those intense, pleasant dreams, I was, alas, copulating with the good Denis.

It would have been more than enough to make me uncomfortable if those dreams showed me making love with the good Denis—but there were only absurd, impossible couplings, in which one sole thing was manifestly obvious, which was that Denis was pushing his strange genitals into mine, and I was delighted, alas.

•

Long, cold, haunted years went by. I visited my mother as often as my husband, in their miseries.

•

“The good Denis, the good Denis,” my mother said again and again, “does he remember me sometimes?”

“My Virgins, all my Virgins, so patiently assembled, and I’ve abandoned them! My Marys, forgive me!” my husband intoned in a murmur that never failed to lull me to sleep, though he was entirely unaware, I was convinced, that he was doing so.

A start, the shadow of a fear, an irrational mistrust wrenched me awake.

And, from the armchair covered in gray vinyl—identical to the one I sat in while pretending to have stopped listening to my mother, hoping she might reveal secrets that were real and not imagined—from the hard armchair that had become mine in my husband’s room, I saw myself tugging at my own hair, jerking my face back and forth, forcing myself to see with eyes no longer veiled by easy sympathy: my husband had become a mysteriously disturbing man.

•

And in those days, in my misery, I thought I saw the good Denis everywhere.

And although, every morning, I tried to forget how I’d appropriated him in my dreams, how my sick dreams had pawed and besmirched his impeccably respectable body, the day found ways of reminding me how much he should, if he knew, fear my fantasies.

Because I thought I saw the good Denis everywhere.

“Does he remember me?” my mother kept asking.

“Just let this good Denis show up now!” I sometimes answered.

•

I looked for him in the inexhaustible expanses of the Web.

I thought I found him in the person of a certain Flora, a beautician in Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port.

Because why, I said to myself, should the good Denis not be incarnated in bodies other than the one my mother had known? Why should he not manifest himself in a variety of forms, perhaps ambiguous, perhaps straightforward and clear, as that lady from the Pyrénées-Atlantiques seemed to be, her personality in every way one with the good Denis’s?

Did he know, wherever he was, that I was on a quest to find him?

Was he entertaining himself by testing my imagination?

I had so little, so little, alas.

But enough to convince myself that Flora—whose Facebook account I’d come across, either accidentally or because it was the will of a fate governed by Denis—that Flora was one of the forms the good Denis had taken to reveal himself to my consciousness.

Unlike Régine, the good Flora had no objection to meeting.

But then—nothing, alas.

It wasn’t him, couldn’t be him—I could see that straightaway.

It was only Flora, absolutely, utterly, and unquestionably, in her own thoughtful, decent, humble goodness, a Flora who could not compare with what I expected from the good Denis.

After that, I met Régis, Sylviane, Maria, Alain.

The good Denis was not in them, no matter how hard I tried to draw him out.

He wasn’t there. He wasn’t anywhere.

•

“Big news, darling,” my mother then told me. “Denis is coming to visit me. He’ll be here Friday, in my room.”

“No, Maman, that’s not possible. You must be confused. I don’t know who’s coming to see you, but it can’t be Denis.”

My whole body was trembling, not because I saw in my mother’s claim evidence of cognitive decline but because I was afraid that she was telling the truth.

She shrugged her slender shoulders, smiling, impassive, understanding me but not pitying me—with the serene, almost indifferent hardness that now marked her dealings with me, as if, resigned to finding me foolish, pointlessly complicated, she had, without vain regret, abandoned all hope of seeing me change.

On the day she’d named, which I wished I could put off forever, I found myself at her side, perched on the gray armchair as she sat on her bed, shrunken but valiant, bold, unafraid.

“I don’t know, my girl,” she said quietly, “if the good Denis will leave me in peace or torment me, but whatever his choice it will be the right one.”

Then my racing heart, understanding before my mind, which was automatically formulating a sarcastic or perhaps infuriated answer, my enlightened, aware heart, prudent and sensible, began to pound so hard that I jumped up and ran from the room.

In the hallway, I met all the women wearing my mother’s clothes, the cardigan, the nightgown, the lace-sleeved blouse—no, not all the women, maybe two? I don’t know anymore.

I went home, making plans to flee.

Where could I go that the good Denis would never find me? Frantic, I called my mother, even as I suspected she might be more on Denis’s side than on mine and would betray me without meaning to, without even knowing it.

I called her all the same, thinking that she was the only one who could give me, innocently, without thinking she was rescuing me or even wanting to rescue me, the best advice on how to escape the good Denis’s embrace.

•

“Maman, don’t give Denis my address.”

“It’s no use, my girl. Apparently, he has a date with you.”

“Is he there in your room?”

“Yes, of course, he always did come on time.” (She thought she’d lowered her voice, but she was whispering loudly, like a little girl who thinks she need only put on a costume in order not to be recognized or blindfold herself to keep from being seen.) “He said he’d come and join you in the place you decided on together.”

“I never decided on anything with him, ever, not even in my thoughts!” I cried.

“I don’t know, my girl, what am I supposed to say?” my mother whispered with what sounded like a last sigh, and then, to wrap things up, again called me “darling,” which had always vaguely implied that she’d had enough of my questions. Because she never called me “darling” as much as when she wanted to be rid of me, rid of the sight of a woman she vaguely remembered she was supposed to love but in whose face or expression or anything else she found nothing to justify that love or even to suggest that the woman was particularly likable.

“The good Denis has a date with you, darling, wherever you are. He actually just told me that. And now, darling, let me talk to him, let me, darling, enjoy my reunion with the good Denis, please, darling.”

And so, knowing there was no way my mother could flee, locked in the home I’d put her in, I gave up on warning her about the good Denis’s intentions. In truth, I accepted the painful thought that not only had my mother resigned herself to her deadly fate but her weary heart, her bored old heart, had eagerly welcomed it.

As for me, oh, no, I wasn’t ready yet. The sense that a great injustice was being plotted against me so outraged me that I imagined bursting into my mother’s room, furious and triumphant, stronger than the good Denis, and spitting at him, “You won’t get me! Impostor! My death will not wear your face!”

I imagined barricading myself in my house, turning a deaf ear to all coaxing entreaties, to all voices, unctuous or urgent, and, especially, to those that eloquently evoked a long-ago bond. But then, collecting my thoughts, I realized that the good Denis, if he was someone I should now fear, would know just how to convince me to open my door to him, and that my lost, desperate, submissive mind could never win a fight against his subtle brain, would never even dream of trying.

I went to visit my husband in the home, where they were doing their best to make him understand that he had no reason to want to die before his time.

I found him glum, plaintive, sometimes strangely boastful.

He confessed that he was happy to be alive, in spite of everything.

All the same, he said, he was proud that he’d wanted to die, and he seemed determined to make something heroic of that intention, as if, having had to choose between the mindless reflex to stay alive and the noble aspiration to kill himself, he’d settled for the former only to make things easier for us—for me and the rest of the world.

I sat down in the gray armchair while he lay stiffly on his bed of lamentations, not ailing in any way, held down by nothing.

Oh, my husband!

I loved him so when we were young.

Now he was nothing like the man I knew then—his very eyes, once brown, seemed bereft of color, always full of fierce tears that never flowed.

“Denis will be coming here,” I said to him. “You know, the good Denis?”

And I savagely, furiously hoped that when Denis entered he would take my husband in his grim embrace, forget about me, not even see me.

Wasn’t that only right?

Because I myself, ardently, wanted to live. ♦

(Translated, from the French, by Jordan Stump.)