Title: The Buggy
Author: Roddy Doyle

There were people at the far end of the beach. Some adults, a lot of children. An extended family, maybe—he didn’t know. He tried to see if one of the adults was carrying a baby or if there was a toddler—a padded lump—plonked on the sand.

He didn’t want to walk over, down from the path, across the sand and stones, to the buggy. It was facing the sea. If the people up the beach had been nearer to it, he’d have known that it was theirs. He’d have known that they’d parked the buggy there at the edge of the sea so the baby would drink in the air—the ozone, whatever it was—and sleep, and stay asleep for a while. But it stood out, alone. There wasn’t an adult or a sibling, a towel or a bucket, anywhere near it. It made no sense.

It was more than likely empty. That didn’t make much sense, either, a buggy abandoned on the beach like that. But he remembered abandoning a buggy himself, years ago—it would have been more than thirty years—when the frame had buckled as he was pushing it up the hill in that place in France they’d gone to on their way to the ferry in Le Havre. Mont-Saint-Michel. A spectacular place, dripping with history and religion, but all he remembered about it was the ache in his arms, and the heat, as he pushed the buggy and the toddler in it up the incline, and the metallic screech as the frame—the sides—surrendered and the toddler seemed to disappear, as if she had been eaten by the buggy. The toddler, Gráinne, was fine—she had a toddler of her own these days—but the buggy wasn’t savable. No amount of bending or hammering would have coaxed it back into shape. They’d left it beside a bin and passed three more buggies, buckled and discarded, on their way back down to the car park.

Maybe that was what had happened here. The frame had given up as the buggy was pushed—shoved, forced—across the sand. But he was looking at it and he knew: there was nothing wrong with this one. It was a solid-looking thing; calling it a vehicle wouldn’t have been ridiculous. A small adult could have squeezed into it. A hen or a stag party—he could picture the other eejits pushing a little bride or groom from one pub to the next in the buggy he was looking at.

It wasn’t buckled, but it might have been abandoned, and he wanted nothing to do with it.

Was the tide coming in or on its way out? He didn’t know. He hadn’t paid much attention to the tides and their times since he was a kid. He remembered how much he’d loved looking them up in the back of his father’s Independent, after his father had shown him how to read the charts.

The sea—the wave he was looking at now—stopped a yard, a metre, from the buggy’s front wheels, and receded. He waited for the next wave. Exactly the same—from where he stood. It got no closer to the wheels. He looked again, from left to right, to see if anyone was going to claim the buggy before the sea took it.

He should have kept driving. Of course, he should have. He’d been on his way to meet his brother, who’d moved down to Arklow. He’d left the house early—hours early—before he’d wanted to. He’d just been anxious—anxious about finding his brother’s place, anxious about the traffic, anxious about leaving the house, anxious about meeting his brother. He’d seen the sign for the beach and he’d turned left, off the motorway. And here he was, about to witness a drowning, an abandonment. Something bad. Something dreadful. An accusation, a misunderstanding, a night in a Garda station, a slot on the news. Or just an empty buggy on a cold Irish beach. A mystery. A story he didn’t want to make up, or even think about.

He should have kept driving. He shouldn’t have left home in the first place.

He didn’t want to do it—he really didn’t. He’d go over now to the buggy; he’d look in, he’d bend down. Even here, on the path above the beach, he could feel it. The magic, the curse—the man he’d been thirty years ago. The man who would have known what to do. The man who wouldn’t have hesitated. But he was so far away from being that man, he’d have to turn into an entirely different man—a man who wasn’t in him.

He could remember being a kid. He remembered being very small. He could remember looking up at the handle of the fridge, in the kitchen. He could remember standing beside his father, resting his arm on his father’s knee as his father ate his dinner. He could remember the smell of his father’s tobacco. He could remember the paint on his father’s trousers. He could remember his father telling his mother that he’d change his trousers after he’d finished his dinner; he was starving and the grub wouldn’t taste any better in clean trousers, the trousers weren’t the ones eating it. He remembered his mother laughing and calling his father an eejit. He remembered looking up at them—their words and laughter—over his head. That was how far back he could go. But not just that—the little lad was still in him. He was the much, much older version of that child. And the older boys, the other layers of his life—they were in him, too. Not just the memories—it wasn’t that they were vivid. They were living things, events—he could live them now. He could scratch at the blue paint on his father’s cord trousers. He could hear his mother’s laughter—now he could. He could feel his foot hitting a wet leather football. He could hear the chalk on a primary-school blackboard. He could taste the first girl’s tongue—he could feel her sweat on his cheek as they kissed, both of them afraid to stop, like they were both cycling bikes for the first time and would fall off if they slowed down or stopped.

But the man—the competent young man he’d been, the father—he couldn’t feel him at all.

He could see him. He could see him take Gráinne from the buggy, making a joke of its collapse, making her brothers laugh—The poor ol’ buggy; your bum was too big for it, Gráinne—and carrying her back down the hill. But he couldn’t feel her weight on his arm, or the confidence—the knowledge—that he’d make it all the way without changing arms or putting her down and trying to persuade her to walk.

He could remember another buggy. He was standing on the platform as the train—the DART—came slowly into Killester station, with the boys on either side of him. A double buggy this time—before Gráinne was born. He had one boy’s hand in his own left hand—the younger lad, Colm—and he held the buggy, folded, in his right hand. The older boy, Seán, held on to the buggy. The train stopped. There was no one getting off, no one there to press the button to open the train door. He forgot that Seán loved pressing the button, that it was his job, the thing that made him more important than his little brother. He let go of Colm’s hand for a second, to give the button a jab—and Colm was gone. He had tried to step onto the train; his stride fell short of the gap, and he dropped between the train and the platform, under the train. Someone had seen what had happened and was shouting up the platform to the driver, as he got down on his knees, gently grabbed Colm’s outstretched hand—Good lad, up you come—and pulled him up to the platform, gave him a hug, Colm smiling, not a bother on him, then got himself, the boys, and the buggy onto the train, and dealt with Seán’s tears.

If the train had been moving, if Colm had slid further beneath it, if the guy on the platform hadn’t been there to shout the warning to the driver—all of these possibilities rattled away inside him as the train left the station and the boys sat so they could both look out the window and get ready to be surprised by any trains dashing past in the other direction. Ambush!

But, really, he’d been fine, even happy. He’d known that he’d just have had to reach down, his arm in the gap between the train’s green side and the rain-drenched cement of the station platform, and hold Colm’s hand—not even grab it—just hold it and lift the boy effortlessly to safety. He’d have managed it. He remembered examining the soaked knees of his jeans and brushing the grit off them with his open hand. Mission accomplished.

He looked at the hand now, his right hand. It wasn’t the same one—it wasn’t the hand that had saved Colm. It wasn’t the age, or the liver spots. It wasn’t even the hand. The hand, his arm, shook sometimes—just slightly—when he had to reach out to grab something, and sometimes he was happier holding a mug or a glass in both hands till he became used to the weight. But it wasn’t his hands or his arms or aging or anything. It was him. Just him. That phrase from the pandemic, “essential worker”—he’d been an essential father. He could remember rescuing Colm, but he couldn’t imagine it—he couldn’t feel it. He couldn’t believe he’d done it. He didn’t believe he’d done it. Or any of the other things he’d done when he was a father. Not just observed or witnessed, stored away for later. Done. Picked up, set down, pushed, pulled, fed, tickled, comforted. His physical life beyond children, too. Ran, gasped, laughed, cried, came. The verbs—the action words. He had the words, but the actions? He could walk and drive and eat and sleep. He could go through the motions. He could get through the day.

But he didn’t live.

The tide was coming in—the sea was closer to the buggy. Another minute and the waves would be digging under a front wheel.

There was another buggy story. He’d pushed the buggy, empty—he couldn’t remember which buggy; they’d gone through five or six—down to the shops, with Seán walking beside him. Seán was grand walking anywhere, it didn’t really matter how far. But, coming back, he often went on strike. Setting out, he’d object to the buggy—Buggy’s for babies!—but on the way home he’d sit on the ground, plonk himself down, in puddles, or right in front of shopping trolleys and pit bulls and pensioners, and refuse to walk. Even then he objected to the buggy. He wouldn’t climb into it or let his father pick him up and fasten him in. This particular time, Seán—the adorable little bastard—shoved the buggy out onto the road, right in front of an oncoming car. The driver braked, but the car hit the buggy side-on—he’d never forget the noise, the thump. The buggy went into the air and landed clean, all four wheels at once, facing the car, and the driver, a woman with a carful of her own babies, stared out at the empty buggy and screamed and screamed and fell out of the car and looked under it and on the roof for the missing baby—Oh, Jesus, oh, Jesus, oh, Jesus, oh, Jesus—while the missing baby, Seán, pointed at her and laughed. Funneee!

He could remember it like a scene from a film. It was a very good film. But he wasn’t in it.

What happened?

Where had his life gone? Not the years—the blood. Where was the life?

The buggy was listing—it was going to topple. The next wave or the one after, it was going to be on its side and the baby—if there was one—would be strapped in and helpless.

If there was one.

He’d forgotten how hard moving across soft sand was; his ankles were already aching. He nearly fell—the sole of his shoe slid on a stone. He watched a wave wallop the wheel—he saw the buggy pushed back. He didn’t seem to be getting any closer—he’d left it too late. His shoes were full of sand—there was a stone digging into his heel. But the ground was more solid; there was a layer of stones, a thick band that stretched along the beach. He got over the stones quickly enough, and he was nearly at the buggy—he could feel the handle, all the handles, in his grip—when a wave slid up over his shoes and he was lifting his feet, moving like a mad thing, his feet smacking the water, and he caught the buggy, he grabbed one of the handles and pulled it back with him, up to the bank of stones, and he knew before he looked. He had the buggy by both handles now, and he parked it, still facing the sea, and looked—no baby. He was relieved—and disappointed—and angry. His feet were freezing—his legs, up to his knees and past them—fuckin’ freezing. And he laughed. He was angry, and delighted to be angry. He was soaking and didn’t know what he’d do, and he didn’t care.

—Oh, God. Thank you!

It was a woman, a young woman running at him, sliding over the stones.

He checked again—the buggy was empty. He wondered why she was thanking him.

—I forgot all about it, she said.

She looked the part, the young mother, exhausted and lovely. But she didn’t have a baby, on her hip or in her arms.

He held on to the buggy.

—You’re drenched, she said. I’m so sorry.

He shrugged. He wasn’t sure if it was a proper shrug. He was gripping the handles and leaning over the buggy, protecting the baby that wasn’t in it.

She was a bit uncertain—he could see that. She’d expected him to roll the buggy across the stones to her, or to turn it around and offer her the handles. It probably looked like he needed the buggy to hold himself up. He looked down. He was wet past his trousers, halfway up his jumper.

—I left my phone in the car, she said. Are you all right?

Jesus Christ, she wanted to phone for an ambulance—for him.

He stood up straight. He let go of the buggy.

—I’m grand, he said.

—You must be frozen, she said.

His job now was to get her to stop talking to him like he was an old man. An old man who’d fallen into the water, or who’d wet himself.

—I’m grand, he said again.

He patted a buggy handle.

—Where’s the owner of the vehicle? he asked.

She smiled.

—He’s in the car, she said. In the car park.

—If he hasn’t driven away, he said. I’m only joking.

She looked behind her, toward the car park that they couldn’t see from where they stood.

—I wouldn’t put it past him, she said.

He moved first. He walked off the sand, pulling the buggy with him.

—He wanted to go to the toilet like a big boy, she told him. In the dunes.

—Fair enough, he said. What’s his name? I feel like I should know.

He pulled at a wet trouser leg where it was stuck to his thigh.

—Seán, she said.

—I’ve a Seán as well, he told her.

—Really? she said. That’s amazing.

They were on the tarmac, off the sand. He let go of the buggy. She took hold of it and pointed it at the car park.

—Tell Seán I said hello, he said.

She laughed. She smiled.

—I will, she said. Bye. Thanks again.

—Seeyeh.

She hadn’t asked him if he was O.K. or if he knew where he was going, or if there was someone he could phone to come and collect him. She’d seen a man who was fine, and she’d walked away. He was freezing, and stiff. He’d drive to Arklow now and change into one of his brother’s tracksuits.

He took his phone from his trousers pocket and rubbed the screen dry on the shoulder of his jumper. He went to Favourites and tapped “Seán.”

—Dad?

—Howyeh, son. Are you busy—can you talk?

—What’s up? Are you all right?

He told his son about how he’d been on his way to Arklow, about how he’d been early so he’d stopped at the beach. About how he’d gone for a walk. How he’d seen the buggy facing the sea. How he’d seen the tide coming in, how he’d dashed down to the sea to rescue the buggy.

He didn’t hesitate.

—There was a baby in it, Seán.

—Ah, Jesus—a baby? Are you serious?

—I couldn’t believe it, he said. Fast asleep.

—No!

—Yeah.

There—in the car park beside the Irish Sea—he’d never felt happier. He watched the mother drive slowly to the gate, stop, then turn left, out, onto the road. He waved at the back of the car. A Volvo, he thought it was. Black, or very dark blue.

—Was the baby O.K.?

—Ah, yeah, he said. Not a bother on him. And come here—guess what his name was. ♦