Title: The Middle Voice
Author: Han Kang

The woman brings her hands together in front of her chest. Frowns, and looks up at the blackboard.

“O.K., read it out,” the man with the thick-lensed, silver-rimmed spectacles says with a smile.

The woman’s lips twitch. She moistens her lower lip with the tip of her tongue. In front of her chest, her hands are quietly restless. She opens her mouth, and closes it again. She holds her breath, then exhales deeply. The man steps toward the blackboard and patiently asks her again to read.

The woman’s eyelids tremble. Like insects’ wings rubbing briskly together. The woman closes her eyes, reopens them. As if she hopes in the moment of opening her eyes to find herself transported to some other location.

The man adjusts his glasses, his fingers thickly floured with white chalk.

“Come on, now, out loud.”

The woman wears a high-necked black sweater and black trousers. The jacket she’s hung on her chair is black, and the scarf she’s put in her big, black cloth bag is knitted from black wool. Above that sombre uniform, which makes it seem as if she’s just come from a funeral, her face is thin and drawn, like the elongated features of certain clay sculptures.

She is neither young nor particularly beautiful. Her eyes have an intelligent look, but the constant spasming of her eyelids makes this hard to perceive. Her back and shoulders are permanently hunched over, as though she is seeking refuge inside her black clothes, and her fingernails are clipped severely. Around her left wrist is a dark-purple velvet hairband, the solitary point of color on an otherwise monochrome figure.

“Let’s all read it together.” The man cannot wait for the woman any longer. He moves his gaze over the baby-faced university student who sits in the same row as the woman, the middle-aged man half hidden behind a pillar, and the young postgraduate student sitting by the window, slouching in his chair.

“Emos, hēmeteros. ‘My,’ ‘our.’ ” The three students read, their voices low and shy. “Sos, humeteros. ‘Your’ singular, ‘your’ plural.”

The man standing by the blackboard looks to be in his mid- to late thirties. He is slight, with eyebrows like bold accents over his eyes and a deep groove at the base of his nose. A faint smile of restrained emotion plays around his mouth. His dark-brown corduroy jacket has fawn-colored leather elbow patches. The sleeves are a bit short, exposing his wrists. The woman gazes up at the scar that runs in a slender pale curve from the edge of his left eyelid to the edge of his mouth. When she’d seen it in their first lesson, she’d thought of it as marking where tears had once flowed.

Behind pale-green lenses, the man’s eyes are fixed on the woman’s tightly shut mouth. The smile vanishes. His expression stiffens. He turns to the blackboard and dashes off a short sentence in ancient Greek. Before he has time to add the diacritical marks, the chalk snaps and both halves fall to the floor.

•

Late spring of the previous year, the woman herself had been standing at a blackboard, one chalk-dusted hand pressed against it. When a minute or so had passed and she was still unable to produce the next word, her students had started to shift in their seats and mutter among themselves. Glaring fiercely, she saw neither students nor ceiling nor window, only the empty air in front of her.

“Are you O.K., seonsaengnim?” asked the young woman with curly hair and sweet eyes who sat at the very front of the class. The woman tried to force a smile, but all that happened was that her eyelids spasmed for a while. The students, a little more than forty in number, looked at one another with raised eyebrows. What’s she up to? Whispered questions spread from desk to desk.

The only thing she was able to do was walk calmly out of the classroom. Exerting herself, she managed it. The moment she stepped into the corridor, the hushed whispers became clamorous, as though amplified through a loudspeaker, swallowing the sound her shoes made against the stone floor. Trembling lips pressed firmly together, she muttered to herself from somewhere deeper than her tongue and throat, It’s come back.

It first happened the winter after she turned sixteen. The language that had pricked and confined her like clothing made from a thousand needles abruptly disappeared. Words still reached her ears, but now a dense layer of air buffered the space between her cochleas and her brain. Wrapped in that foggy silence, her memories of the tongue and lips that had been used to pronounce, of the hand that had firmly gripped the pencil, grew remote. She no longer thought in language. She moved without language and understood without language, as she had before she learned to speak—no, before she had obtained life. Silence, absorbing the flow of time like balls of cotton, enveloped her body both outside and in.

The psychiatrist to whom her alarmed mother had taken her gave her tablets that she hid under her tongue and later buried in the flower bed at home. By the time dark-red stamens began to sprout from the salvia in the flower bed, nourished by her buried medicine, a consultation between the psychiatrist and her mother had resulted in her being sent back to school. It was clear that being cooped up at home hadn’t helped, and she mustn’t fall behind her peers.

The state high school that she entered for the first time, months after the letter announcing the new school year beginning in March had arrived at their door, was a dreary, intimidating place. The classes were already far advanced. The teachers were imperious, regardless of age. None of her peers showed any interest in a girl who spoke not a single word from morning to evening. When she was called on to read from a textbook or when the students were told to count out loud during P.E., she would look vacantly up at the teachers and, without exception, be sent to the back of the classroom or have her cheek slapped.

Despite what her psychiatrist and her mother had hoped, the stimulus of social interaction didn’t fracture her silence. Instead, a brighter and more concentrated stillness filled the dark clay jar of her body. In the crowded streets on the way home, she walked weightlessly, as though encased in a huge soap bubble. Inside this gleaming quiet, which was like gazing up at the surface from underwater, cars roared thunderously by and pedestrians’ elbows jabbed her in the shoulders and arms, then vanished.

After a long time had passed, she began to wonder.

What if that perfectly ordinary French word, in that perfectly ordinary lesson, hadn’t sparked something in her? What if she hadn’t inadvertently remembered language, like remembering the existence of an atrophied organ? Why French and not, say, classical Chinese or English? Perhaps because of the novelty of it, because it was a language she could opt to learn now that she was in secondary school. Her gaze had lifted blankly to the blackboard as usual, but there it had snagged on something. The short, balding French teacher was pointing to the word as he pronounced it. Caught off guard, she found her lips trembling into motion like a child’s. Bibliothèque. The mumbled sound came from a place deeper than tongue and throat.

There was no way she could have known how important that moment was.

The terror was still only vague, the pain hesitant to reveal its circuit from the depths of silence. Where spelling, phonemes, and loose meaning met, a slow-burning fuse of elation and transgression was lit.

After graduating from university, the woman had worked first for a book publisher and then at an editorial-production company for a little more than six years; after that she spent almost seven years lecturing on literature at a couple of universities and an arts secondary school in and around the capital. She produced three collections of serious poetry, which came out at three- or four-year intervals, and for several years had contributed a column to a biweekly literary review. Recently, as one of the founding members of a culture magazine whose title had yet to be decided, she’d been attending editorial meetings every Wednesday afternoon.

Now that it had come back, she had no choice but to abandon all such things.

There had been no indication that it might happen, and there was no reason it should have happened. Of course, it was true that she’d lost her mother six months previously, divorced several years earlier, and eventually lost custody of her eight-year-old son, and it was coming on five months since he had moved in with her ex-husband, after a prolonged battle in the courts. Because he was both the eldest grandson by the firstborn son and the only male child on his father’s side, because he was not so very young anymore, because her ex-husband unswervingly maintained that she was too highly strung and that this was a bad influence on the boy—the records of the psychiatric treatment she’d received in her teens were presented as evidence—because her income, compared with her husband’s (he had recently been promoted to the bank’s head office), was both paltry and irregular, the hearing resulted in a comprehensive defeat.

The gray-haired psychotherapist she’d seen once a week because of insomnia after the boy’s departure couldn’t understand why she denied such clear causes. No, she wrote, using the blank paper left out on the table. It isn’t as simple as that.

That was their final session. Psychotherapy conducted through writing took too long, with too much scope for misunderstanding. She politely turned down the psychotherapist’s proposal to introduce her to a speech-and-language specialist.

•

The woman rests both hands on the desk. Her posture stiff, she bows as though she is a child waiting to have her fingernails examined. She listens to the man’s voice filling the lecture hall.

“In addition to the passive and the active voice, there is a third voice in ancient Greek, which I explained briefly in the previous lesson, yes?”

The young man sitting in the same row as the woman nods emphatically. He’s a second-year philosophy student, whose rounded cheeks give him the air of a smart, mischievous kid.

The woman turns to look toward the window. Her gaze passes over the profile of the postgraduate student, who scraped by with a pass in premed but didn’t have it in him to be responsible for the lives of others, so gave it up to study the history of medicine. He’s big and has a chubby, double-chinned face, and wears round, black, horn-rimmed glasses, and at first glance appears easygoing. He spends every break with the young philosophy student—they bat silly jokes back and forth in ringing voices. But the instant the lesson begins his attitude changes. Anyone can see how tense he is, terrified of making a mistake.

“This voice, which we call the middle voice, can express an action that relates to the subject reflexively.”

Outside the second-floor window, sporadic points of orange illuminate the bleak low-rise buildings. The young broadleaf trees hide the bare outline of their skinny black branches in the darkness. Her gaze passes silently over the desolate scene, the frightened features of the postgrad student, the pale wrists of the Greek lecturer.

Unlike before, the silence that has now returned after a period of twenty years is neither warm nor dense nor bright. If that original silence was similar to that which exists before birth, this new silence is more like that which follows death. Whereas in the past she had been submerged underwater, staring up at the glimmering world above, she now seems to have become a shadow, riding on the cold hard surface of walls and bare ground, an outside observer of a life contained in an enormous water tank. She can hear and read every single word, but her lips won’t crack open to emit sound. Like a shadow bereft of physical form, like the hollow interior of a dead tree, like that dark blank interstitial space between one meteor and another, it is a bitter, thin silence.

Twenty years ago, she failed to predict that an unfamiliar language, one with little or no resemblance to Korean, her mother tongue, might break her silence. She has chosen to learn ancient Greek at this private academy because she wants to reclaim language of her own volition. She is almost entirely uninterested in the literature of Homer, Plato, and Herodotus, or in the literature of the later period, written in demotic Greek, which her fellow-students wish to read in the original. Had a course been offered in Burmese or Sanskrit, languages that use an even more unfamiliar script, she would have chosen that instead.

“For example, using the verb ‘to take,’ in the middle voice, ultimately means ‘I choose.’ The verb ‘to wash’ would be rendered, in the middle voice, ‘I wash X,’ when X is a part of myself. There is an expression in English, ‘He hanged himself,’ right? Ancient Greek doesn’t need to say ‘himself’—if we use the middle voice, the same meaning can be expressed in a single word. Like this,” the lecturer says, and writes on the blackboard: ἀπήγξατο.

Musing over the letters on the blackboard, the woman picks up her pencil and writes the word in her notebook. She hasn’t come across a language with such intricate rules before. The verbs can change their form according to, variously: the subject’s grammatical person and number; the tense, of which there are various grades; the mood, of which there are four distinct types; and the voice, of which there are three. But it is thanks to these unusually elaborate and meticulous rules that the individual sentences are, in fact, simple and clear. There is no need to specify the subject, or even to keep to a strict word order. This one word—modified to denote that the subject is third-person singular; the tense aorist, meaning it describes something that occurred and concluded at some point in the past; and the voice middle—has compressed within it the meaning that someone has hanged himself.

Around the period when her child—the child she had borne eight years ago and for whom she had now been deemed unfit to care—first learned to speak, she had dreamed of a single word in which all human language was encompassed. It was a nightmare so vivid as to leave her back drenched in sweat. One single word, bonded with a tremendous density and gravity. A language that would, the moment someone opened her mouth and pronounced it, explode and expand as all matter had at the universe’s beginning. Every time she put her tired, fretful child to bed and drifted into a light sleep herself, she would dream that the immense crystallized mass of all language was being primed like an ice-cold explosive in the center of her hot heart, encased in her pulsing ventricles.

She bites down on that sensation, the mere memory of which is chilling, and writes: ἀπήγξατο.

A language as cold and hard as a pillar of ice. A language that does not wait to be combined with any other prior to use, a supremely self-sufficient language. A language that can part the lips only after irrevocably determining causality and manner.

She sits without speaking amid the rumble of the students reading. The Greek lecturer no longer makes an issue of her silence. He angles his body away from the class and wipes the sentences from the blackboard, rubbing the soft eraser cloth over the board with expansive sweeps of his arm.

“Starting in June, we will read Plato,” the Greek lecturer announces, leaning against the now clean blackboard. “Of course, we will continue to study grammar alongside.” He holds the chalk in his right hand, and uses his left to push his glasses farther up his nose.

•

Even when she could talk, she’d always been soft-spoken. It wasn’t an issue of vocal cords or lung capacity. She just didn’t like taking up space. Everyone occupies a certain amount of physical space according to his or her body mass, but voice travels far beyond that. She had no wish to disseminate her self. Whether on the subway or in the street, in a café or at a restaurant, she never spoke in an unreservedly loud voice or called out after someone to get his attention. In every situation—the only exception was when she was lecturing—hers was the quietest voice in the room. Already very thin, she would hunch her shoulders and back so that her body took up less room. She understood humor and had quite a cheerful smile, but when she laughed it was so low as to be barely audible.

Even when she could speak, she would sometimes simply fix her eyes on her interlocutor, as though she believed it was possible to translate perfectly what she wished to say through her gaze. She greeted people, expressed thanks, and apologized, all with her eyes rather than with words. To her, there was no touch as instantaneous and intuitive as the gaze. It was close to being the only way of touching without touch.

Language, by comparison, is an infinitely more physical way to touch. It moves lungs and throat and tongue and lips, it vibrates the air as it wings its way to the listener. The tongue grows dry, saliva spatters, the lips crack. When she found that physical process too much to bear, she was unable to concentrate on writing, even when she was alone. Just as she had always disliked the way her voice diffused through the air, she found it difficult to tolerate the disturbance her sentences wreaked on the silence. At times, she could taste bile at the back of her throat even before she put pen to paper, merely by thinking about writing a word or two.

There had been times when she had peered at the shapes of the words she’d just written, before slowly opening her lips and sounding them out. She had at once been struck by the incongruity of the flattened forms that resembled pinned-down bodies and her own voice belatedly attempting to speak them. She would stop reading and swallow, her throat dry. Like those times when she had to immediately press down on a cut to stop the bleeding, or, on the contrary, strain to squeeze out blood to prevent bacteria from entering her bloodstream.

The gray-haired therapist tried to find the root cause in her childhood. She coöperated with him only halfway. Not wishing to disclose her experience of having lost language as a teen, she managed to retrieve a memory from farther back.

Her mother had come down with what appeared to be typhoid fever when she was pregnant with her. Suffering alternate bouts of fever and chills, she took a handful of tablets with every meal for about a month. Her mother had been brash and impetuous by nature, quite unlike her daughter, and as soon as she was back on her feet she went to the gynecologist and said she wanted the baby gone. She had determined that it couldn’t possibly turn out healthy, given the medication she’d been taking.

The doctor told her that a termination would be dangerous, as the placenta had already formed, and told her to come back in two months’ time, when he would give her an injection to induce a stillbirth. But, when those two months were almost over and the fetus began to move, her resolve weakened, and she did not go to the hospital. She was plagued by anxiety up until the moment the baby was born. Only after she had repeatedly counted the newborn baby’s fingers and toes, still slick with amniotic fluid, was her mind set at ease.

Aunts, cousins, even the meddling neighbor who lived next door told this anecdote to her while she was growing up. You came within an inch of not being born. That sentence was repeated like an incantation.

She was too young then to be able to read her own emotions well, but the horrifying coldness contained in that sentence was something she felt clearly. She almost hadn’t been born. The world was not something that had been given to her as a matter of course. It was merely a possibility that the chance combination of countless variables in the pitch blackness had permitted, a fragile bubble that had coalesced ever so briefly in the nick of time. One evening, after saying an awkward goodbye to her mother’s boisterous, cheerful guests, she had squatted on the maru at the front of the house and watched as the gathering twilight buried the yard. She told the therapist how, as she sat there with muffled breath and hunched shoulders, she had felt the thin, flimsy, enormous single-layer world being swallowed up in the darkness.

The therapist thought this was all very interesting. “You were too young to understand life, and naturally were without the means to live independently then, and every time you heard about what a close call your birth had been you felt a sense of being threatened, as though your whole existence were going to be blotted out. But you’ve grown into a fine adult and now are strong enough to face such things. You don’t have to be afraid. You don’t have to cower. It’s all right to speak up. Straighten your shoulders and take up as much space as you like.”

But she knew that if she followed that reasoning the rest of her life would be one long struggle to find a response to the question that constantly threatened to destroy her fragile equilibrium—the question of whether she really had any claim to existence. Something in the therapist’s lucid, beautiful conclusion didn’t sit right. She still did not wish to take up more space, nor did she believe that she had lived in thrall to fear, or spent her life suppressing what came naturally to her.

Their sessions progressed smoothly, and so when, after five months, her voice hadn’t grown stronger and instead she became mute, the therapist seemed genuinely shocked. “I understand,” he said. “I understand how much you’ve suffered. It must have been agonizing for you to accept losing the custody battle, not to mention the death of your mother immediately before. How unbearably you must have missed your child in the last few months. I understand. You must have felt that it was impossible to withstand everything on your own.”

The exaggerated note of earnest sympathy in his voice astounded her. What she found most intolerable was his claim that he understood her. This was simply not true, and she knew it with a serene certainty.

Silence, the quiet assuager, enveloped them, waiting.

She picked up the pen and paper in front of her and wrote in a neat hand, No. It isn’t that simple.

•

παθεῖν

μαθεῖν

“These two verbs mean ‘to suffer’ and ‘to learn.’ Do you see how they’re almost identical? What Socrates is doing here is punning on these words to remark on the similarity of the two actions.”

She extracts the hexagonal pencil that she has been absent-mindedly leaning on with her elbow. After rubbing her smarting skin, she copies the two words written on the blackboard into her notebook. She writes them first using the Greek alphabet, then tries but ultimately fails to write the meaning next to them in her own language. Instead, she raises her left fist and rubs her sleepless eyes. She looks up at the pallid face of the Greek lecturer. At the chalk clutched in his hand, the letters of her mother tongue like withered bloodstains, but white, distinct on the blackboard.

She bows her head over the book that lies open on her desk. It’s a thick dual-language edition of the first few books of Plato’s “Republic,” containing both the original Greek and the Korean translation. Drops of sweat trickle down from her temples and fall onto the Greek sentences. The coarse-grained recycled paper bulges where they land.

“However, we cannot see the twinning of these verbs simply as a play on words. Since, for Socrates, learning literally meant suffering. Even granting that Socrates himself did not think this in so many words, the thought was at least formulated as such by the young Plato.”

On Thursdays, when Greek class meets, she packs her bag a little earlier than she needs to. After alighting from the bus several stops before the academy, she walks, enduring the afternoon heat radiating from the tarmac. Even after she slips into the building’s shadowed interior, her whole body is drenched in sweat for a while.

Once, she had just gone up to the first floor when she saw the Greek lecturer walking ahead of her. She stopped in her tracks instinctively. She held her breath so as not to make a sound. Having already sensed someone’s presence, he turned to look back over his shoulder and smiled. It was a smile that mingled closeness, awkwardness, and resignation, and made it clear that he had been about to greet her, then brought himself up short. After that day, when she happened to bump into him on the stairs or in the corridor, he did not smile but greeted her faintly with his eyes.

When she raises her head, it seems as though the dimly lit classroom has suddenly brightened, unsettling her. She looks up at the blackboard, blank now during the break. The lecturer has wiped it clean with the cloth eraser, but only lightly, so there are still the odd fragments of Greek script visible. She can even make out a third of a sentence. And a rough whirl of smudged chalk that looks intentional, as if it were done with a broad brush.

She bends over the book again. She takes a deep breath, and hears the distinct sound of her inhalation. Since losing speech, she gets the sense sometimes that her inhalations and exhalations resemble speech. They seem to stir the silence as boldly as the voice does. She’d had a similar thought while witnessing her mother’s final moments. Every time her mother, by then in a coma, expelled a mouthful of hot breath, silence took a step back. And, when she breathed in, the shudderingly cold silence shrieked as it was sucked into her mother’s body.

She clutches the pencil and peers at the sentence she was just reading. She could puncture every single one of these letters. If she pressed down with the pencil lead and made a long tear, she could bore through a whole word, no, a whole sentence. She examines the small black letters, conspicuous on the coarse gray paper, the diacritics that resemble insects both curled up and stretching their backs. A place in shadow, obscured and difficult to tread. A sentence in which Plato, no longer young, ponders and stalls for time. The indistinct voice of someone whose mouth is hidden behind his hand.

She tightens her grip on the pencil. Carefully, she breathes out. The emotion permeating the sentence becomes apparent, like chalk marks or a casual thread of dried blood. She endures it.

Her body bears witness to the fact of her long-term muteness. It appears firmer or heavier than it really is. Her footsteps, the movements of her hands and arms, the long, rounded contours of her face and shoulders—all demarcate clear, strong perimeters. Nothing seeps out, and nothing seeps in past these limits.

She had never been one to spend a great deal of time examining herself in the mirror, but now the very thought seems incomprehensible to her. The face we each imagine most frequently in the course of our lives must be our own. But, once she stopped picturing her face, she found that over time it began to feel unreal. When she happens to catch a glimpse of her face reflected in a window or a mirror, she examines her eyes carefully. Those two clear pupils seem to her to be the only passage linking her to that stranger’s face.

Sometimes she thinks of herself as more like some form of substance, a moving solid or liquid, than like a person. When she eats hot rice, she feels that she herself becomes that rice, and when she washes her face with cold water there is no distinction between her and that water. At the same time, she knows that she is neither rice nor water but some harsh, solid substance that will never commingle with any being, living or otherwise. The only things that she sees as worth reclaiming from the icy silence, something that takes all the strength she possesses, are the face of the child with whom she has been allowed to spend one night every two weeks and the dead Greek words that she gouges into the paper with the pencil she grips.

γῇ κεῖται γυνή.

A woman lies on the ground.

She puts down the pencil, which is sticky with sweat. With the palm of her hand, she wipes away the beads of moisture that cling to her temples.

•

“Mom, they’ve said I can’t come here anymore after September.”

Last Saturday night, she had stared at her son’s face in alarm at these words. He’d grown again, even in the space of two weeks, looking taller, but also slimmer, than before. His lashes were long and thin, tiny diagonals clearly outlined over his soft white cheeks, like a miniature drawing done in pen.

“I don’t want to go. My English isn’t even that good. Dad’s sister who lives there, I’ve never even met her. He says I have to go for a whole year. I’ve only just managed to make friends, and now I have to move again?”

She’d just bathed and put the child to bed, and an apple scent rose from his hair. She could see her face reflected in his round eyes. His face was reflected again in the reflection of her eyes, and in those eyes there was her face again . . . in an infinite series of reflections.

“Mom, can’t you talk to Dad? If you can’t talk, can’t you write him a letter? Can’t I come back to live here again?”

He turned his face to the wall in frustration, and she silently reached out her hand and turned him back to face her.

“I can’t? I can’t come back? Why not?”

He turned to face the wall again. “Turn off the light, please. How can I sleep when it’s so bright?”

She stood up and switched off the light.

The glow from the street lights shone in through the ground-floor window, so she was soon able to make out the clear form of her child in the darkness. There was a deep furrow at the center of his forehead. She laid her hand there and smoothed it out. He frowned again. He lay there with his eyes tightly shut, and even his breathing was muted.

In the late-night darkness of June, the smell of waterlogged grass and tree sap mingled with the smell of food waste. After dropping off her son, she walked the nearly two-hour route through the center of Seoul instead of taking the bus. Some of the roads were as brightly lit as they would be in the middle of the day, with suffocating exhaust fumes and blaring music, while others were dark, and decaying, and stray cats tore at rubbish bags with their teeth, and glared at her.

Her legs didn’t hurt. She wasn’t tired. Illuminated by the pale light in front of the elevator, she stood and stared at her front door, the door through which she was now supposed to enter, leading to the bed where she was now supposed to sleep. She turned around and went back out of the building, out into that summer-night smell, the smell of things that had once been alive going bad. She walked faster and faster, until finally she was almost running, throwing herself into the public phone booth in front of the caretaker’s lodge, where she pulled all the coins she could find out of her trouser pocket.

She heard a voice. “Hello?”

She opened her mouth. She forced out a breath. She breathed in, and then out again.

The same voice spoke again. “Hello?” Her hand trembled as it clutched the receiver.

How could you dream of taking him? That far away? And for so long? You bastard. You heartless bastard.

Her teeth chattered and trembled until her spasming fingers put down the phone. She ran her hand roughly over her cheek, almost as if she were slapping her own face. She rubbed away at her philtrum, her jaw, her mouth that no one had gagged.

That night, for the first time since she lost speech, she looked at herself properly in the mirror. She thought that she must be seeing incorrectly, though she didn’t put the thought into words. Surely her eyes couldn’t be this serene. She would have been less shocked to see blood or pus or gray sludge running from them.

The hatred that had boiled up in her a long time ago went on seething, and the agony that used to surge in her remained swollen, a blister that wouldn’t burst. Nothing healed.

Nothing ended.

•

“This world is ephemeral and beautiful, is it not?” the lecturer says. “But, rather than this ephemeral and beautiful world, Plato wanted one that was eternal and beautiful.” With his placid gaze behind the pale-green lenses, he looks directly at her clear eyes. Perhaps because the students are especially unfocussed today, for close on ten minutes he has been explaining the content of the text rather than its grammar. At some point, the nature of these reading classes has come to loosely straddle Greek language and philosophy.

“People who, though they believe in beautiful objects, do not believe in beauty itself, Plato deemed such people to be in a state of dreaming, and was convinced that one could be persuaded that this was the case through reasoning. In his world, everything was upside down like this. That is to say, he considered that he himself was awake and not dreaming. He who, rather than trusting in the beautiful objects of reality, trusted only in an absolute beauty that cannot exist in reality.”

She is sitting at her desk, motionless as ever. Her back, neck, and shoulders are stiff from spending so long in the same position. She opens the notebook and scans the sentences she wrote down during the hour before the break. She jots down words in the blank spaces between the sentences. She perseveres through noun declensions and complicated usages of tense and voice to form simple, incomplete sentences, and waits for her lips and tongue to stir into motion. Waits for the first sound to spring from them.

γῇ κεῖται γυνή.

A woman lies on the ground.

χιὼν ἐπὶ δειρῄ.

Snow in throat.

ῥύπος ἐπὶ βλεφάροις.

Earth in eyes.

“What’s that?” the philosophy student, who sits in the same row as her, asks. He points to the notebook, where she’s written incomplete sentences in ancient Greek following on from γῇ κεῖται γυνή, “A woman lies on the ground,” which was one of the examples they’d learned earlier in the lesson. She doesn’t get flustered, doesn’t hastily shut the notebook. She musters all her strength and looks at the young man’s eyes as though into the depths of ice.

“Is it poetry? Poetry written in Greek?” The postgrad student sitting by the window turns to look at her, curiosity etched on his face. Just then, the lecturer comes back into the classroom.

“Seonsaengnim!” The philosophy student chuckles mischievously. “Look, she’s been writing poetry in Greek.”

In his seat behind the pillar, the middle-aged man turns to look at her, his expression one of amazed admiration, and bursts into loud laughter. Startled by the sound, she closes the notebook. She watches blankly as the lecturer approaches her chair.

“Really? Would you mind if I take a quick look?”

She has to strain to concentrate on his words, as if she were deciphering a foreign language. She looks up at his glasses, their lenses so thick they make her eyes swim. All at once she understands the situation, and packs the thick study book, her notebook, dictionary, and pencil case in her bag.

“No, please stay seated. You don’t have to show it to me.”

She stands up, shoulders her bag, pushes her way past the row of empty chairs, and heads for the door.

In front of the emergency exit that leads to the stairs, someone grabs hold of her arm from behind. Startled, she whips around. It’s the first time she’s seen the lecturer from this close. He’s shorter than she thought, now that he isn’t standing on the raised platform at the front of the classroom, and, oddly, his face suddenly looks aged.

“I didn’t mean to make you uncomfortable.” Taking a deep breath, he steps closer. “Are you . . . Do you maybe not hear what I’m saying?” He raises his hands and makes a gesture. He repeats the same gesture a couple of times, and, as if interpreting himself, haltingly speaks the words: “I’m sorry. I came out to say I’m sorry.”

She stares mutely at his face, looks at him as he takes another breath and, undeterred and emphatic, continues signing: “We don’t have to talk. You don’t have to make any kind of answer. I’m really sorry. I came out to say I’m sorry.”

•

Her son was six.

For once it was a leisurely Sunday morning, and, after an aimless conversation, she suggested to him that they come up with names for themselves based on what natural thing they most resembled. Her son liked the idea, claimed Sparkling Forest for himself, then named her, too. Decisively, as though it fitted her exactly.

“Thickly Falling Snow’s Sorrow.”

“What?”

“That’s your name, Mom.”

Not knowing what to say, she peered into his clear eyes. She lay down beside him and closed her eyes. If she opened her eyes, it seemed she would see the thickly falling snow, so she closed them even more tightly. With her eyes closed, none of it was visible. Neither the big glittering hexagonal crystals nor the flakes soft as feathers. Neither the deep purple sea nor the glacier like a white mountain peak.

There are neither words nor color for her until the night is over. Everything is covered by the thick snow. A snow that is like time, time that fractures as it freezes, settles ceaselessly over her stiff body. The child by her side isn’t there. Lying motionless at the bed’s chilly edge, she calls the dream into being, over and over again, to kiss her son’s warm eyelids.

•

The single-lane one-way street runs for a fair stretch alongside the motorway noise barrier. She is walking along its pavement. Not many people go this way, so the council has let it get somewhat neglected. Clumps of grass rise tenaciously from the cracks in the paving slabs. The thick black branches of the acacias, which had been planted in a broad line around the flats in place of a wall, stretch toward one another like arms. The repulsive fog of exhaust fumes mingles with the scent of grass in the humid night air. This close to the road, the roar of car engines slices into her eardrums the way sharp skates cut into ice. In the grass at her feet, a grasshopper cries slowly.

It’s strange.

It’s as if she had already experienced a night exactly like this.

It feels like she’s walked this road before, wrapped up in a similar sense of shame and embarrassment.

She would have still had language then, so the emotions would have been clearer, stronger.

But now there are no words inside her.

Words and sentences track her like ghosts, at a remove from her body, but near enough to be within ear- and eyeshot.

It is thanks to that distance that any emotion not strong enough drops away from her like a scrap of weakly adhering tape.

She only looks. She looks, and doesn’t translate any of the things that she sees into language.

Images of objects form in her eyes, and they move, fluctuate, or are erased in time with her steps, without ever being translated into words.

On one such summer night, a long time ago, she had suddenly started to laugh to herself while walking down a street.

She had looked at the gibbous thirteenth-day moon, and laughed.

Thinking that it resembled someone’s sullen face, that its round sunken craters were like eyes concealing disappointment, she had laughed.

As though the words inside her body had first burst out into laughter, and it was that laughter that had spread across her face.

That night when the heat that arrived just past the summer solstice had, as now, withdrawn hesitantly behind the darkness.

That night long ago that was not so long ago, her child walking ahead of her, while she followed along, cradling a huge cold watermelon in her arms.

Her voice had been affectionate as it gently diffused outward, trying to take up the minimum of space.

Her lips had shown no signs of gritted teeth.

Blood had not gathered in her eyes. ♦

(Translated, from the Korean, by Deborah Smith and Emily Yae Won.)