Title: Time for the Eyes to Adjust
Author: Linn Ullmann

To see, to remember, to comprehend. It all depends on where you stand. The first time I came to Hammars, I was barely a year old and knew nothing about the great and upheaving love that had brought me there.

Actually, there were three loves.

•

I organize, catalogue, and number. I am the same age now that my father was when I was born. Forty-eight. My mother was twenty-seven; she looked both much younger and much older than her years back then.

•

I don’t know which of the three loves came first. But I’ll begin with the one that arose between my mother and my father in 1965 and ended before I was old enough to remember anything about it.

I have seen pictures and read letters and heard them talk about their time together and heard other people talk about it, but the truth is you can never know much about other people’s lives, least of all your parents’, especially if your parents have made a point of turning their lives into stories that they then go on to tell with a God-given ability for not caring in the least about what’s true and what’s not.

•

The second love is an extension of the first and concerns the lovers who became parents and the girl who was their daughter. I loved my mother and my father unconditionally. I took them for granted in the same way that, for a while, one takes the seasons for granted, or the months or the hours, one was night, and the other was day, one ended where the other began, I was her child and his child, but considering that they, too, wanted to be children, things sometimes got a little difficult. And then there’s this: I was his child and her child, but not their child, it was never us three. When I browse through the pictures spread out on my desk, there isn’t a single photograph of the three of us together. She and he and I.

That constellation doesn’t exist.

•

The third love. A place. Hammars, or Djaupadal, as it was known in the old days. Hammars was his place, not hers, not the other women’s, not the children’s, not the grandchildren’s. For a time, it felt as if we belonged there, as if it were our place. If it is true that everyone has one place, although I suppose it isn’t, but if it were true, then this would be my place. I recognized the smell of the air and the sea and the stones and the way the pine trees hunched in the wind.

•

My father was a punctual man. When I was a child, he opened the case of the grandfather clock in the living room and showed me its mechanism. The pendulum. The brass weights. He expected punctuality of himself and of everyone else.

In the autumn of 2006, he had less than a year left to live, but I didn’t know that then. Nor did he. I stood outside the white limestone barn with the rust-red door and waited for him. The barn had been converted into a cinema and was surrounded by fields, stone fences, and a few scattered houses. A bit farther off lay Dämba Marsh, with its abundant birdlife—great bitterns, cranes, herons, sandpipers.

We were going to see a film. Every day with my father, except Sunday, was a day with film. I’ve been over and over it, trying to remember which film we were seeing that day. Maybe Cocteau’s “Orphée,” with its leaden dream images? I don’t know.

•

“When I make a film,” Jean Cocteau wrote, “it is a sleep in which I am dreaming. Only the people and places of the dream matter.”

•

I have thought about it again and again, but can’t remember. It takes several minutes for the eyes to adjust to the dark, my father used to say. Several minutes. Which is why we always arranged to meet at ten to three.

That day, my father didn’t show up until seven minutes past three—that is, seventeen minutes late.

There were no signs. The sky didn’t darken. The wind didn’t tug at the trees and shake them. No storm was brewing, and the leaves didn’t swirl in the breeze. A nuthatch flew over the gray fields and off toward the marsh; other than that it was quiet and overcast. Not too far off, the sheep—referred to on the island as lambs, regardless of their age—were grazing as they always did. When I turn and look around, everything is the same as usual.

Pappa was so punctual that his punctuality lived inside me. If you grow up in a house near the railway tracks and you are awakened every morning by the train roaring past your window, by the trembling of walls, bedposts, and windowsills, then, even when you no longer live in the house by the tracks, you will be awakened every morning by the train hurtling through you.

It wasn’t Cocteau’s “Orphée.” Maybe a silent film. We used to sit in green armchairs and let the images, unaccompanied by piano tinkling, flicker across the screen. He said that when silent films disappeared, a whole language was lost. Could it have been Victor Sjöström’s “The Phantom Carriage”? That was his favorite. For him, a single night is as long as one hundred years on Earth. Night and day he must carry out his master’s business. I would remember if it was “The Phantom Carriage.” The only thing I remember about that day at Dämba, apart from the nuthatch over the field, is that my father was late. This was as impossible for me to comprehend as it was to comprehend why the moon might unexpectedly vanish. My father came seventeen minutes late and nothing was out of the ordinary and everything had changed. He drew down the moon, and time went out of joint. We had arranged to meet at ten to three—it was seven minutes past three when he pulled up in front of the barn. He had a red jeep. He liked to drive fast and make lots of noise. He had big black bat-eye sunglasses. He offered no explanation. He had no idea that he was late. We sat through the film as if nothing had happened. It was the last time we saw a film together.

He came to Hammars in 1965, forty-seven years old, and decided to build a house there. The place he fell in love with was a deserted stony beach, some gnarled pine trees. He was overcome by an immediate sense of familiarity: he knew that this was his place, it echoed his innermost ideas of form, proportion, color, light, and horizon. And then there was something about the sounds. Of course, there is no way of knowing what my father saw and heard that day on the beach, but this was when it all began, or this was not really when it began—he had been to the island five years earlier, maybe that was when it began, who knows when something begins and ends—but for the sake of order I will say: this was where it all began.

•

They are shooting a film on the island, it is his second shoot there, and she who will be my mother plays one of the two female leads. In the film, her name is Elisabet Vogler. Over the course of the ten films they make together, he gives her many names. Elisabet, Eva, Alma, Anna, Maria, Marianne, Jenny, Manuela (Manuela—that’s when they make a film together in Germany), and then Eva again, and then Marianne again.

But this is the first film my parents make together, and they fall in love almost immediately.

Elisabet, unlike my mother, is a woman who stops talking. Twelve minutes into the film, she lies in bed, entrusted in her inexplicable silence to the care of Nurse Alma. Her bed stands in the middle of a hospital room. The room is sparsely furnished. A window, a bed, a nightstand. It is late evening, and Nurse Alma, having introduced herself to her patient, turns on the radio, switches between stations, settles on Bach’s Violin Concerto in E Major. She exits and Elisabet is left lying alone.

In the middle of the violin concerto’s second movement, the camera finds Elisabet’s face and stays on it for almost a minute and a half. The image grows darker and darker, but it darkens so slowly that you hardly notice it, or at least not until it is so dark that her face is barely visible on the screen, but by then you have been looking at it for so long that it has become imprinted on your retina. It is your face. Only then, after a minute and a half, does she turn away from you, exhale, and cover her face with her hands.

First, my eye is drawn to her mouth, all the tiny muscles and nerves in and around her lips, and then, because she is lying down, I tilt my head so that I can look at her face directly. And when I tilt my head it feels as though I were lying down beside her on the pillow. She is very young and very beautiful. I imagine I am my father looking at her. I imagine I am my mother being looked at. And even though it’s growing darker, her face seems to light up, to burn, to dissolve right before my eyes. It’s a relief when she eventually turns away, covering her face with her hands.

Mamma’s hands are slender and cool.

One evening, my father took his cinematographer to a place he had scoped out. Maybe I could build a house here, he said, or words to that effect. Yes, but wait, the cinematographer said, come with me a little bit farther and I’ll show you an even nicer spot. When you walk along the beach, the way they did that day in 1965, you don’t reach the end of a road; there is no headland, hill, clearing, or precipice, no geographic or geologic formation to indicate a change in the landscape; there is stony beach as far as the eye can see, nothing begins or ends, just continues. If this spot lay in the woods and not on a beach you could have said that my father had been taken to a place in the middle of the woods and that it was here, right here, that he decided to build a house. The two men stood there for a little while. How long? Long enough, or so the story goes, for my father to have made up his mind.

Had he stood there for too long and thereby noticed his own awe, noticed that he was giving it a name—home, love—the urge to shake his head and keep walking would surely have made itself felt. I detest emotional sloppiness and bad theatre. Had he stood there too briefly, chances are that he would not have let the place get to him and consequently decided to devote his life to it. A few minutes, maybe. Long enough to hear the wind in the already wind-bent pines, the wind in his ears, the wind in his trouser legs, the pebbles under the soles of his shoes, his hand fiddling with coins in the pocket of his leather jacket, the oystercatcher’s shrill, Morse-like biik-biik-biik-biik. I picture my father turning to the cinematographer and saying, Listen to how quiet this place is.

First, love. An intuitive certainty. Then a plan. There will be no improvising. No. Never improvise. Everything has to be planned down to the last detail. She who will be my mother is part of the plan. He will build a house, and she will live in the house together with him. He takes her there, shows her the spot and points and explains. They sit on a rock. Actually, I think she’s the one who says, Listen to how quiet this place is. He wouldn’t have said it, not to her, not to the cinematographer. There were a thousand sounds on the island. Instead, he turns to the woman who will be my mother and says, We are painfully connected. She thinks it sounds nice. And a little unpleasant. And confusing. And true. And maybe a little bit corny. He is forty-seven; she is more than twenty years younger. In due course, she gets pregnant. The film shoot has long since ended. The house is being built. In the letters he writes to her, he worries about the great age difference between them.

•

I was born out of wedlock, and in 1966 this was still frowned upon. Illegitimate. Bastard. Love child. Brat. None of that mattered. Not to me. I was a bundle in Mamma’s arms. It didn’t matter to my father, either. One child more or less. He had eight already and was known as the demon director (whatever that means) and a womanizer (pretty obvious, that one). I was the ninth. We were nine. My oldest brother died many years later of leukemia, but back then we were nine.

•

The mother and the father were lovers for five years and spent much of that time at Hammars. The house was finished now. In 1969, the mother left Hammars, taking her daughter with her. Four years later, one summer day in late June, the girl came back to visit the father. She didn’t like leaving the mother, but the mother promised to call every day.

Nothing had changed, except that now it was Ingrid who lived there. Everything stood exactly where it had stood when the mother and the girl left, the grandfather clock ticked and struck on the hour and the half-hour, the linen cupboard creaked, a golden light shone in on the pine-clad walls and fell in bands across the floor. The father crouched down in front of the girl and said gently, I suppose Mamma is the only one allowed to touch you.

•

She was small and skinny and came to Hammars every summer with two big suitcases that were left sitting in the yard until someone carried them into the house. She raced out of the car and around the yard and into her room and out into the yard again. She wore a blue summer dress that skimmed the tops of her thighs. The father asks, What have you got in your suitcases? How is it possible for such a little girl to have two such big suitcases?

His house was fifty metres long and kept getting longer, and it took forever to walk from one end to the other. Running indoors was strictly forbidden. He furnished it and extended it, a little more each year—the house grew in length, never in height. No basement, no attic, no stairs. She would stay there for all of July.

•

He is dreading her arrival, Hello and how do you do, there’s a girl running around the yard, a little girl with legs like pipe cleaners and knobbly knees, or she’s dancing, this girl almost always in the middle of some complicated choreography; you can be having a conversation with her and instead of answering whatever question she has been asked she’ll begin to dance, or else she’ll plant herself in front of him, a challenge of sorts, and then he’ll smile, What now? What to say? What to do? The girl dreads being away from the mother, but looks forward to visiting the father and everything that is this place, the house, the island, her room with its flowery wallpaper, Ingrid’s cooking, the moors and the stony beach and the ocean stretching green and gray between her father’s island and the Soviet Union (if you lose your way and end up there, they’ll never let you out), and the fact that everything is exactly as it has always been and always will be. The father has rules. She understands them. The rules are an alphabet that she learns even before she learns the real alphabet. “A” is “A” and “B” is “B,” she doesn’t have to ask. “Z” is where “Z” has always been, she knows where “Z” is. Her father is rarely angry with her. But he can get very angry. He has a bloody temper, the mother says, he can fly into a rage and shout, but the girl knows where the anger is and dodges it. She is skinny. Skinny like a filmstrip, the father says.

One day, the mother calls the father on the telephone. She’s upset because he won’t let their daughter drink milk. He believes that milk is bad for the stomach. The father believes that a lot of things are bad for the stomach. But especially milk. The mother believes that milk and children go together. Everybody knows that. What the father says about milk goes against the most basic knowledge of what a growing child needs. And anyway, the mother says, he doesn’t usually take much interest in the girl’s upbringing, but this, this, he has opinions on. The mother’s voice grows shrill. All children must drink milk, especially the girl, who is so skinny. This, as far as I know, is the only quarrel the mother and the father have about the girl’s upbringing.

•

Change. Disturbance. Hello and how do you do. Let me look at you. You’ve grown. You’ve become pretty. And then, perhaps, he puts his thumbs and forefingers together to form a square so that he can look at her through the square. He’ll shut one eye and peer at her with the other. Take a picture. Frame her with his fingers. She stands perfectly still and gazes solemnly at the square. It is not a real camera—if it had been a real camera, she would have wriggled and squirmed and wondered how she would look in the picture.

To be hauled away from what you’re doing, by a child. Not to be left in peace with your work, your writing. But it’s only now, at the moment when she arrives with her suitcases and it’s been a year since they saw each other last, only then is he hauled away from his work. She dances around the yard. He forms his hands into a camera and looks at her through it with the one open eye. I don’t know who carries the suitcases inside. Or unpacks them. Or hangs the dresses and shorts and T-shirts in the small closet in her room. Most likely it’s Ingrid. Soon he’ll be able to go back to his study (which lies at one end of the house, while her room lies at the other) and continue working.

The girl’s mother, she who is responsible for the girl every month of the year except July and who believes that milk is good for children, would also like to shut herself away in a room and be left in peace; she, too, wants to write, she wants rules and an alphabet, just like the girl’s father. But she can’t figure out how. The mother’s alphabet keeps changing, it’s impossible for the girl to keep up, no matter how hard she tries. All of a sudden, “A” is “L.” It’s baffling. “A” was “A,” but then it turned into “L” or “X” or “U.” The mother has tried installing herself in every room of the house in order to write, but all in vain. Disturbances wherever she goes.

My nerves are frayed, she says.

When the mother’s nerves are frayed, it is a good idea to be very, very quiet.

Life with the mother was so much more unpredictable than life with the father. This had to do with the circumstances of life. The father would die first, it would probably be very sad, but not altogether unexpected, considering how old he was. The father’s death was under way, the girl and the father were very aware of this, and that was why they exchanged sad goodbyes every summer. They were good at it. Saying goodbye to the mother was a very different story. The girl would scream, and the mother would hold her close, Don’t cry, now, be a big girl and don’t cry, hugging her tightly, glancing around, trying to stave off the girl’s hands, which clung to various parts of her body. Is anyone looking? The mother is always conscious of who is looking and what they might be thinking. This screaming child. This rib-cage-skinny girl so bristling with dissonance.

The father had often told the mother that she was his Stradivarius. That is, an instrument of the finest quality with a rich, full-bodied sound. The mother had taken these words to heart and repeated them, He said I was his Stradivarius.

She is my violin.

I am his violin.

This is an example of how both the mother and the father allowed themselves to be seduced by metaphors. Neither of them knew or even cared about the numerous studies proving that a Stradivarius does not, in fact, sound better than other, comparable violins.

Then again: what is the point of studies like these?

At Hammars nothing changed. Or, rather, the changes occurred so gradually that you didn’t notice them, and for a very long time the girl lived with the sense that the way things are right now is the way they have always been. Order and punctuality. The chairs stood where they had always stood. The pictures hung where they had always hung. The pine trees outside the windows were just as gnarled. Ingrid had a long brown braid that flipped back and forth as she made her way through the house, dusting or fluffing up cushions.

Eventually, Daniel and Maria began coming to Hammars at the same time as the girl. They were older than she, but children nevertheless. And that was how it was: days and nights in the long, narrow house surrounded by sea, stones, thistles, poppies, and barren moors reminiscent of West African savannas. One summer was the same as the next. Every evening at six o’clock, the girl and the Hammars family had dinner in the kitchen. Ingrid did the cooking and the food was always good. After dinner, everyone would sit for a while on the brown-stained bench looking onto a gravel yard, on which first one car stood parked, later two cars, and eventually a red jeep. Beyond the bike shed lay a forest with three trails running through it. And while the father and the children sat on the bench Ingrid would stand—leaning slightly against the brown-stained post that held up the little pent roof—and smoke her daily cigarette.

•

The brown-stained bench was warm and slightly rough—if you rubbed your hand against it, you’d get splinters. The house was made of wood and stone and surrounded by a stone fence. In the evening, when the grownups were reading their newspapers, the girl would walk down to the sea on her own. The wave-sculpted stony beach sloped, and when she had walked far enough to be able to wade in the water she would turn around and look up at the house and the stone fence. And then it was almost gone, vanished, all of it, lost in a haze of light and gray, gravel and sky, bleached by the summer sun, the years, the days, as if someone had thrown an invisibility cloak over it, although not completely invisible—the windows and the doorframes were cornflower blue, and these you could see—there was a house there, it couldn’t hide itself completely.

Every once in a while, someone would say, Why don’t we sit on the pretty side of the house, the side with the beautiful view of the sea and the shifting light on the horizon? But still they went on sitting at the front of the house, on the brown-stained bench, while Ingrid leaned against the post and smoked. It was as if everyone took part in the smoking of that one cigarette.

•

The father had a study in which he sat and wrote every day, The only thing I can brag about is that I’ve been diligent, he would say. The girl called his study the office, and every evening the office was transformed into a cinema. The father would pull a white canvas screen out of a black case, the lights were switched off, and the film could begin. The black case was so long and narrow that, when it was closed, it looked like a coffin—a coffin for a very thin person, a stick man. The case had snap locks and a handle like one for a suitcase or a ladies’ handbag, and during the day it sat on top of a silvery rack leaning against the back wall.

And then, at eight o’clock, the father opened the case, whereupon what during the daytime looked like a coffin would turn into a milky-white movie screen of such impressive dimensions that it covered the wall like a taut sail.

In a little room separated from the office by a wall with a glass partition stood the projectors. During her first years at Hammars, the father ran the projectors himself, but later he taught his son Daniel to do it. Daniel was paid ten kroner per screening. The girl was not to touch the projectors. Touching the projectors was even more strictly forbidden than making noise during the grownups’ afternoon nap, more strictly forbidden than leaving the doors at Hammars open or sitting in a draft, about as strictly forbidden as being late. No one was ever late at Hammars. But no matter how punctual you were—you had an appointment and you arrived perfectly on time—you would still say, I’m sorry I’m late. This was the Hammars greeting, as familiar as gulls’ cries in summer. I’m sorry I’m late. And if, contrary to expectation, you happened to be running a few seconds behind, you would say, Forgive me for being late. Can you please forgive me? I have no excuse! That hardly ever happened, though.

For the first few years, the girl is allowed her very own screening at six-thirty in the evening. She sits in the big, battered armchair with her feet on a footrest. The black case has been opened and the projection screen unfurled. She is as skinny as a twig. She has long straggly hair and buckteeth. The father has switched off the light, closed the door, and stationed himself on the other side of the partition.

“O.K.?” he calls out.

“O.K.,” the girl replies.

The office windows are shuttered, dark, quiet.

“Do you feel a draft?”

“No.”

“O.K., then, let’s watch the movie!”

Later, though, long after the girl has started seeing films along with the grownups, the father decides to renovate the old barn beyond the lilac hedge at Dämba. The Cinematograph is finished the summer the girl turns nine—although nobody calls it the Cinematograph, they call it bion, Swedish for “cinema”—and it has a heavy, rust-red door and a huge keyhole with light streaming through it. The cinema has fifteen seats—soft moss-green armchairs—and two cutting-edge sea-green projectors that whirr softly in the darkness behind a glass panel.

To get from Hammars to Dämba, the girl and her two half siblings squeeze into the back seat of the father’s car at exactly 7:40 P.M., twenty minutes before the movie starts. It is a short drive, ten minutes at the most, but once you arrive you need an additional ten minutes to adjust. No rushing in and out. Same thing in the afternoon. The afternoon screening starts at three, but you arrive at ten to.

Maybe I ought to call her something. The girl. I can also let it be. When the father turned sixty, he invited all his nine children to Hammars to celebrate his birthday. It was the summer of 1978—the summer the girl turned twelve. I don’t remember how the idea of a big party—the first of many—was presented to her; she probably wasn’t even aware that she had so many siblings, or maybe she was aware of it in the same way that she was aware that Norway was made up of many different counties. She had just finished fifth grade and would soon be moving to the United States with her mother and going to an American school. Apart from Daniel and Maria, whom she already knew, she had seen her siblings only in photographs. It was the day before the big party. The father’s birthday was on the fourteenth of July, France’s National Day, and she was finally going to meet everybody. All eight of them at the same time. She sat on the brown-stained bench outside the house and waited. Every now and again, she would get up and wander toward the forest, where she picked wild strawberries and threaded them onto blades of grass. Then she would sit down again. She meant to save the wild-strawberry necklaces and give them to her sisters—she had four—but time passed and no one came, so she ate them all herself. Her faded blue dress only just covered her bottom. She had mosquito bites on her thigh and on her hand. There was no place as quiet as Hammars as she sat there alone on the bench watching the grasshopper wake up on the stone fence. When a car came driving along, you could hear it from far away. Usually, when she heard a car, she would run up to the road and over to the first cattle guard, which according to the father marked the boundary between private and public property, and wave her arms so the car would turn around and drive away. They didn’t want people here. But today she stayed where she was, not running up to the road and chasing people away. The father was probably regretting this whole bloody party. It had seemed like such a good idea—a delightful idea!—when he first thought of it. All his children gathered at a party. But one should beware of one’s own good ideas, Aksel Sandemose—a writer whom the father occasionally quoted—once wrote. You can become so smitten with the idea that you forget everything else. Sandemose was talking about writing, but the same can no doubt be said of throwing parties.

The girl’s mother would shake her head at any talk about the father’s women; she didn’t want to hear about wife No. 5, she didn’t want to hear about wife No. 4, I don’t want to hear about them. One tends not to want to hear about the one who came right before and the one who came right after. The mother didn’t like being between No. 4 and No. 5. What does that make you? Four and a half?

The father used to say that for his seventieth birthday he would invite all the wives, too, and the mothers and the women who were neither wives nor mothers, but who had nevertheless played a part one way or another. What do you call them? But now he was sixty, not seventy, and the girl was sitting on the brown-stained bench waiting for her siblings, most of whom she had never met before, and tomorrow, on the big day, the father would be photographed with a wreath of flowers in his hair, surrounded by Ingrid and the children on the steps at Dämba. The girl turned, looked toward the road, and scratched her thigh. The first mosquito bite is the sweetest, the father used to say. It pops up somewhere on your body and it’s white and new and slightly pink, shouting, Scratch me, scratch me. When you have lots of mosquito bites, it’s not so sweet anymore, your skin hurts, the bites don’t shout, there’s no sound in them, and the itching keeps you awake at night.

When she heard the first car, she stood up and immediately sat down again. They’re here! They had arrived. She looked around. Where was everybody? Pappa! Ingrid! Daniel! Maria! Come! They’re here! And then the first car turned in to the gravel yard, and then another and then one more, and out of the cars tumbled young women and men, the girl’s siblings, and their boyfriends and girlfriends and suitcases and silk scarves and red lips and laughter and flared trousers and hair and voices. Where was the father? Was he even there when they all arrived, or had he sought refuge in his study? It didn’t really matter. He was an old man with stomach aches, who hated visitors. Look! Here comes my little family! More and more people filled the yard. The girl began to laugh. This wasn’t a little family. It was a big family. Look—there’s Jan. He is the oldest and the wisest, with a wife and children. And there—there’s the sister who lives in London, who smiles like a movie star. And there’s the airline pilot. The girl knew that one of her brothers was an airline pilot who flew back and forth across the Atlantic every week. He was the tallest of them all—she knew it was him the minute she laid eyes on him—he turned around in the yard and when he caught sight of her he set down his suitcase and opened his arms, he was treetop tall and slim and the best-looking man she had ever seen, and she had, despite her tender years, seen lots, and she ran toward him and he swept her so high off the ground and swung her around so fast that she nearly lost her breath, but instead of losing her breath she opened her eyes, slowly, as if she were underwater, and from up there in his arms she saw not only Hammars, with its moors, its lambs, and its old limestone farmhouses, but the whole of Fårö, from the limestone quarry up at Norsholmen and the English cemetery south of Dämba to the sand dunes at Ullahau, where the girl had heard that you could go sledding in the winter, to the old grocery store down by the church and the beaches at Sudersand, Ekeviken, and Norsta Aurar, and all the way out to the sea stacks at Langhammars and Digerhuvud, and just when she thought he was going to set her down on the ground again his arms grew even longer and she rose even higher in the air and now she could see the ocean and the horizon and the Iron Curtain there in the distance, where, if you lose your way and end up there, they’ll never let you out.

•

Half sister and half brother—as if they weren’t real. Half-born, half-alive, half-remembered, half-forgotten—shadow children who vanished into the lilac hedge or slipped between the bars of the cattle guards. In the evening, there was a party at Dämba, and the girl danced at full speed around and around and around until she had hardly any clothes left on her body.

•

The father gave her a green-lined notebook and told her to remember to write in it every day. If the girl didn’t write things down, the father said, she would likely forget all of it. But the girl didn’t want to keep a diary. Instead, she invented a secret language and filled the green notebook with secret tables and words: Ivoefo qqjttfsS j tåmb. She drew maps, too. Hundreds of maps. The measurements didn’t need to be too exact—what mattered were the borders. Beyond the brown-stained bench lay the bike shed, and beyond the bike shed lay the forest with its three trails. One trail led to the sea, another trail led to a little shack, and a third led to a clearing or a meadow where the father would later build a new house.

The father’s plan for the new house—all his houses had names, and this one was called Ängen, meaning “meadow”—was for him and Ingrid to live there in their old age. He had it all figured out. They would stay at Hammars in the summer and at Ängen in the winter. Sometimes, he said, the winds from the sea were so violent that it was impossible to sleep at Hammars. At such times, he would rather sleep somewhere else. As would Ingrid. But then Ingrid died and left him grief-stricken.

Some summers were cold, and everyone said it was the coldest summer ever. The father liked it best when it rained. He said that all his worst nightmares played out in deafening sunlight. When the girl was little, she wasn’t allowed to go into the father and Ingrid’s room until the man on the radio had finished reading the weather forecast with temperatures for all of Sweden. Once the man had announced the temperatures for Visby—Visby, seventeen, meaning that it was 62.6 degrees Fahrenheit—the coast was clear, the girl would tear out of bed, run through the house and into the grownups’ bedroom, shouting “Visby, seventeen” over and over again. Like most children, the girl liked making lists and keeping count, and if anyone had asked her about her father she could have said, My father has four houses, two cars, five wives, one swimming pool, nine children, and one cinema.

He grew older, old, he said that things went missing.

“What sorts of things?”

“Words. Memories.”

She didn’t give it much thought at the time. His memory was better than hers. Nothing had changed in that respect. He remembered names, dates, historical events, films, stage sets, pieces of music. He told the same stories over and over again, but he’d always done that; it was part of the summer repertoire. Maybe the time between each telling of the same story had narrowed, but other than that there weren’t any noticeable signs.

•

He liked to make the red jeep roar. He wanted to be heard, he wanted people to hear that he was coming. The girl, who is no longer a girl but a grown woman and mother of two, pictures a flash of red and whirling dust through the forest. Hear how much noise I’m making! See how high above the ground I’m soaring! Now he rounds the bend, he’s going fast, very fast, brakes screeching, a final rev of the engine just for the fun of it, and then he turns it off. He opens the door, grabs his cane, and makes a brave attempt to jump out.

It is exactly ten minutes to three.

•

“What are the words that go missing?”

“Oh, I don’t know . . . I’m in the jeep. I have turned off the engine, there are hardly any other cars on the ferry, I wave to the ferryman and he waves back. I believe he’s been a ferryman here for forty years. Summer is finally over. The gray light has returned. There is a girl standing at the railing, face averted, in her twenties. I’m on my way to Fårösund to buy the morning papers. Suddenly, the sky opens and the rain starts pouring down. The girl looks up at the sky but doesn’t move. The ferry throbs. The rain pours down and I switch on . . . you see? Everything comes to a halt. It starts to rain, the girl looks up at the sky and I switch on . . . oh, for heaven’s sake, what do you call them . . . ? The things you switch on in the car when it rains and then they move back and forth and go swish-swish-swish?”

“Windshield wipers?”

“Exactly! Windshield wipers!”

“You’d forgotten that they’re called windshield wipers?”

“Like a white spot in the brain, forgotten, gone. It happens all the time. I forget things.”

•

It takes several minutes for the eyes to adjust to the dark. You can’t just rush in and out. He repeats the same thing year after year. Some summers, he lets his hair and beard grow. Other summers, he shaves everything off. He has a mole on his right cheek, it gets bigger every year, and he wears huge sepia-tinted sunglasses. He is a little thinner now. And I’m taller than he is.

“Ah, good afternoon,” he says, climbing out of the jeep with difficulty. “Let’s sit on the bench for a while before we go inside.”

In autumn of 2006, we went to Hammars by car. My husband drove. We took our daughter with us. I hadn’t seen my father since the beginning of August. We had agreed to meet outside the cinema.

A few days earlier, we had spoken on the phone. It wasn’t a long conversation.

“What are we seeing?”

“Oh, you’ll find out when you get here.”

“I’m looking forward to it.”

“Me, too! I wish you a warm welcome.”

“See you there at the usual time?”

“At the usual time.”

I’m standing next to Cecilia, waiting, in the autumn gray. She has long, dark hair and wears a bulky parka. I am used to seeing her barefoot, but now she has on thick boots. After Ingrid died, Cecilia handled everything having to do with the houses, in addition to being the appointed projectionist. She was the only one allowed to touch the projectors, which he loved more than anything else in the world. They’re gorgeous old broads, he said. And wearing very well, I might add. To hell with all that goddam digital crap.

I check my watch and glance up. It is eight minutes to three. The road is quiet.

I turn to Cecilia.

“He’s late.”

“Yeah, it happens.”

“Pardon?”

She stuffs her hands in her pockets.

“It happens sometimes . . . it’s not uncommon.”

“Not uncommon . . . what are you talking about?”

I look at my watch.

“It’s five to three.”

“So what? We don’t start until three.”

She doesn’t look at me.

“Cecilia, he is late . . . my father is late. He should have been here at ten to. That doesn’t worry you? It worries me.”

She sighs, looks at me.

“The first time it happened, I was worried—that was last winter. I waited for six or seven minutes, and when he didn’t show up I went looking for him. That time, he had driven off the road, opened the door, tried to get out of the jeep, tripped, and fallen. I found him lying in the ditch.”

“But . . . we have to go look for him!”

“Go ahead if you like, but he’s often been late since then and not because he’s lying in a ditch. He’ll be here soon, you’ll see. If he’s very late, I’ll take the car and go find him.”

We stand there in silence. I check my watch again. Five past three. A nuthatch flies over the fields and off toward the marsh. And then nothing. I want everything to be the way it was before, and everything around me is the way it was before. This landscape never changes. But no matter where I stand or walk, no matter what I say or think, no matter where I look, the time agreed upon, ten to three, has long since passed. And then I hear the jeep. It’s coming now. Tearing down the road. Faint birdsong is drowned out by the drone of the engine. His sunglasses are so big they cover his whole face—he looks like a nocturnal animal. He slams on the brakes, opens the door, gropes for his cane. It is seven minutes past three. Seventeen minutes late. He takes off his sunglasses and stretches his arms out to me.

He does not say, I’m sorry I’m late. Or: Forgive me for being late.

Pappa puts his arm around my shoulders, and we walk toward the door. I nestle up to him.

“Ah! There you are!” he says. “Welcome! Oh dear! Did you have a comfortable trip? Come, come, let’s sit down here on the bench for a moment before we go inside and see the film.” ♦

(Translated, from the Norwegian, by Thilo Reinhard.)