Title: Upstate
Author: Emma Cline

There was only a small profile photo of Djuna on the Web site, but even from that sliver, with some burly-bearded husband or boyfriend half in the frame, Kate could tell that she was attractive. They didn’t live in this house, Djuna and whoever was in the picture with her—it was obvious from the online calendar, how often the place was rented—but the profile said that they lived nearby, would be available if there were any issues.

•

The house was two hours away. It was a hot day, like the inside of a dog’s mouth. Kate forgot to pack shorts, so she changed into a pair of Paul’s old swim trunks. Paul drove, his hand on Kate’s leg.

The car was Paul’s family car—his son’s surf wax in the cup holder, dog hairs on the back seat. They didn’t have to worry anymore about accidentally leaving any damning evidence of Kate behind. Paul had been divorced for almost a year now. He and his ex-wife still shared the car. The dog, with his many medications and nightly steroid shots, had been remanded to the ex’s household. A mostly civil détente, these days. Paul didn’t want to talk about her or the divorce, newly moral. He had cut his gray hair shorter, too, an almost monkish style. Another kind of penance, Kate thought.

Now Kate spat a piece of gum back into its wrapper, folded the wrapper into a napkin. Then she unscrewed the cap of an empty water bottle and stuffed the gum and napkin inside. Collecting garbage in garbage—efficient, a nesting doll of trash.

“I love driving in the city,” Paul said, making the turn onto the highway, but he looked tense, shoulders up around his ears. He had told Kate once that he didn’t mind being stuck in traffic, but that also seemed untrue—at least it had the time he’d yelled at a driver who wouldn’t let him merge. The vitriol was startling, Paul smiling wildly. “Thank you!” he shouted inside the car, his grin eating his whole face. “Thank you so fucking much.”

•

The sliding glass door was a wall of coolness at their backs when they sat on the porch to undo their laces, their bags beside them. They used the electronic keypad to open the door with the code Djuna had provided.

The house was small and boxy, the stairs running up along the stone fireplace.

“It’s great,” Kate said, wandering the rooms in her bare feet. There were plants and a suncatcher squeezing out rainbows of light and a pretty, wood-countered kitchen. A droopy linen hammock was strung across a corner of the living room to pseudo-bohemian effect.

“It’s a nice place, huh?” Paul said. He looked pleased, though Kate had been the one who found the listing, set everything up. But Paul had paid—so there was that.

Kate opened the refrigerator. A former guest had left a single Rolling Rock, a half-used bottle of maple syrup drooling in the door. A jar of fizzy-looking mustard that should probably be thrown away. Not by her. She unloaded the beer, the groceries, though they hardly counted as groceries: they’d mostly brought snacks. The kitchen was nice enough, but they would go out to eat. Kate didn’t really enjoy cooking and neither did Paul.

•

There were no photos anywhere, no personal effects—the clues came in the books on the shelves, “The Dance of Anger,” “The Hyperactive Child.” “Mating in Captivity”—the presence of this book, Kate theorized, meant there was an eighty-per-cent chance that someone in the couple had recently cheated, the book part of a strenuous joint effort to rebrand infidelity. Was the perpetrator Djuna, or the bearded husband?

The information packet requested that guests not enter the downstairs closet.

“The internet router is located in this private closet,” the instructions read, “but please contact us first if there is an issue with the internet.”

Of course Kate and Paul looked in the downstairs closet—opened the door to see straw hats, out-of-season clothing, boots, and hanging jackets, an unplugged laser printer on top of a cardboard box. There were leather notebooks in a stack—diaries, Kate discovered when she opened one, and she flipped through the pages for a bit before she realized she was looking for her own name and that was crazy.

•

Jolted by his recent, fifty-fifth birthday, Paul had finally kicked a decades-old cigarette habit. In its place, he ate at least two bars of dark chocolate a day. He broke them into perfect squares with the wrapper still on—to prevent mess. It seemed like another wish for a new self. Now he was dismantling a bar at the counter and reading work e-mails.

“Do people ever go in the hammock, you think?” Kate said. “Or is it just there to be cute?”

She hoisted herself into it. Instantly the fabric swallowed her up. Was it comfortable, lying there, or not comfortable? Not really comfortable.

Kate poked just her head out of the hammock.

“Take a picture.”

Paul paused his work on the chocolate bar to hold up his phone.

“Let me see,” she said.

Paul came over with chocolate breath and handed her the phone. She zoomed in on her own face. “Eh,” she said, though she swiftly sent the photo to herself.

It took not insignificant effort to get out of the hammock.

•

All these towns where there was nothing to do but walk up and down the sidewalks and go in and out of small stores. The ritual seemed important, though, the getting out of the city. Even if you mainly did the same things you would do there, at least here you were relieved of the fatigue of choice. There was only one of everything—one Thai restaurant, one coffee place, one bakery.

They walked all the way to the river. The river didn’t look so wide from here. It was a flat, dull green. They stepped out on the rocks, then stepped back.

The train tracks ran right alongside the water.

Paul took multiple photos of the river. Kate hated photos without people in them—no one ever looks at those kinds of pictures again, she said, but Paul disagreed. And maybe Paul did look at his photos—what did Kate know?—maybe he was regularly scrolling back through his archive of flowers and sunsets and mountaintop views, the collection of things he’d seen, a full moon recorded on his phone as a blurry gape of light.

Paul wanted to go a little way down a private driveway. Just to check it out, he said. He surprised Kate sometimes, what rules he’d break and what rules he’d obey. There were bee boxes stacked in a field. He didn’t know what they were—she did. It was satisfying to have the whiff of rural knowledge.

Paul had grown up going to the beach for the summer months. He was passionate about the ocean. This was represented by the blue rubber bracelet he wore on his wrist until Kate made fun of it and he stopped wearing it. It had been some type of charity Clean Up the Ocean thing.

Kate kept looking at the train tracks. It felt as though a train would come barrelling through at any second, and they were both bracing for it. No train came.

Already the day seemed extremely long. They’d walked the length of Main Street. Browsed through any store they could conceivably enter. It was barely lunchtime.

•

There was a swimming hole nearby that was meant to be quieter, more beautiful than the popular swimming hole. A friend had recommended it. There were detailed instructions on a message board about how to get to the special swimming hole, but the Web page wouldn’t fully load. You were supposed to park on some other road and hike in—there were coördinates, but they didn’t have enough service for Google Maps.

Paul was no help. Why did Kate always end up with people who didn’t know what was happening, who were as unsure of themselves as she was?

They just went to the popular swimming hole, finally, after driving for a while in one direction, then turning around, stopping to ask a man in a tollbooth that turned out to be the entrance to a private club. He was listening to the radio and wearing a blue uniform shirt. “You can try that way,” he said, pointing to an unmarked dirt road, but neither of them was that kind of person.

They parked with dozens of other cars.

“It’s gonna be packed,” Paul said, preëmptively annoyed, and they were both, Kate was sure, picturing the better swimming hole they hadn’t been able to find and the better versions of themselves who were having a much better time there.

Kate carried their towels and snacks in a paper grocery bag. Paul was older, had raised a family—shouldn’t he have thought to bring a tote bag for the weekend? And sunscreen, too. Shouldn’t one of them be the kind of person who kept track of the procurement and deployment of such things, the tools that smoothed over life’s little discomforts?

They were like Garbage Pail Kids, Kate thought: no sunscreen, no tote, humping along the sunny bank with their paper sack, the threat of its ripping imminent. They’d eaten the salami and bread in their kitchen before heading out—ravenous—and brought what was left, the fat supermarket strawberries and a bag of Lay’s and a bottle of pink lemonade, now warm. High-fructose blah blah. Two peaches that weren’t very good—Kate smelled the stems and they smelled like nothing.

Some days she ate ten nectarines in a row. They were consistently less disappointing than peaches.

•

The water was cold. They watched some teen-agers jumping off rocks.

“I read a book,” Kate said, “where this guy’s wife dies after jumping into a swimming hole. Like, she has some terrible spinal injury.”

Paul made a neutral sound.

“I think it could happen to me,” Kate said. “As punishment.”

Paul didn’t ask for what; he’d told her that lately he had imagined getting a brain tumor.

•

When she finally went to swim, she shuddered from the cold.

“Look at you,” Paul said, already in up to his neck and treading water. “Such a baby.”

And now she kept shivering, but she wasn’t sure anymore if it was a real impulse or if she was performing in the ways he wanted her to.

Once, early on, Paul had said, Let’s tell each other whenever we feel like we’re acting false. And Kate had stiffened because suddenly it all seemed false. She stuck her hand back into a container of blueberries and sifted for a fresh one, a firm one, and agreed, but the air in the apartment felt changed and so she looked at her phone.

•

More teen-agers showed up. Their antics were nerve-racking: there was much climbing of rocks, many daredevil jumps. The rocks had furry caps of algae that looked slippery. Kate tried to stop anticipating calls for help.

The snacks were long gone, the paper grocery bag stuffed with their trash. Paul’s nose was getting sunburned.

“Ready?” he said.

•

“This way,” Paul said, and Kate ducked under a branch to follow him up from the bank. She carried her clothes and her shoes, the towels in her arms: she kept checking to make sure she hadn’t dropped anything.

Back in the parking lot, she stood at the passenger door. The asphalt started to burn her bare feet. She shifted from foot to foot.

Paul had hidden the car keys in the front right tire well.

“They’re gone,” he said, stricken.

“Gone?” Her arms were full. She wanted to be inside the car, in the air-conditioning.

She pulled at the door handle.

Paul was on his knees, checking the ground.

Kate pulled the door handle again. She dropped her shoes on the asphalt and shoved her feet half in. A dread was making itself known—this wasn’t fun.

“Oh, Jesus,” Paul said, standing up. “This isn’t my car.”

Kate looked at the back seat. There was stuff in there but it was unclear if it was their stuff. Maybe it belonged to Paul’s children? There was a blue towel and a travel neck pillow. Were these objects familiar or unfamiliar?

“Seriously?”

“Look.”

And, yes, there was exactly the same car across the parking lot. This car was the same make as Paul’s car, the same color, but it was not Paul’s car.

They had come up a different path to the parking lot and got turned around.

“Jesus,” he said as they walked over. “I was freaking out.”

“And here we go,” he said, holding up the keys from the tire well.

“You sure this is our car?” she said.

“Are you joking?”

Kate got in without responding and kicked her feet out of her untied shoes. She didn’t say that the car felt weird, like a totally alien car—though it was their car, because here was her little bottle of trash and there were the dog hairs stippling the back seat.

•

Paul had Norcos from his son’s wisdom-teeth extraction and they split one back at the house, both of them wet-haired from the shower. They lay on the carpet in front of the fireplace, though it was too hot to actually make a fire. Kate had two beers; she felt her eyes go a bit dreamy.

“We should get in,” Paul said. “The hammock.”

Neither of them moved from the carpet.

They had sex there on the floor, mostly to underscore to each other that they were indeed on vacation.

“Uh-oh.”

She had bled a bit on the rug, she saw afterward. Djuna seemed like the type who would notice and charge a fee. She looked up how to get bloodstains out of carpet—dish soap. There was only the hippie kind in the house, perhaps not toxic enough to clean anything. But Kate scrubbed hard—the stain relaxed, then mostly disappeared.

•

Nearly time for dinner. Finally. The hours up here seemed to pass at half speed.

An artist had bought a building in town and turned it into a nice restaurant, the kind of place where the waiters had to wear striped shirts and linen half-aprons and serve the usual roster of updated classics, the roast chicken and the parsnip mash. They’d made a 5 p.m. reservation, embarrassing, but they would have gone earlier if it were possible.

They were lying on the floor, talking.

Paul’s eldest daughter was getting a nose job. She had just turned seventeen. This bothered Kate to a degree she couldn’t explain.

“Can’t she just wait?” she said. “She might change her mind.”

“I don’t want to hear about it again,” Paul said.

“I just—if you let her do this, then what’s next?”

Paul seemed tired and on the edge of angry.

“Never mind,” Kate said. It wasn’t in her purview anyway. Sometimes she was acutely aware of the absolute privacy conferred by Paul’s marriage, or the ghost of his marriage. They could stay together forever, Paul and Kate, and there would still be some core that would remain untouchable to her.

She was going to change the subject, but then a noise drew their attention outside.

A car was pulling into the driveway.

Now the car was parking right next to their car.

It was Djuna, Kate recognized her right away. Oh, God. Was she going to come inside? The stain on the rug was gone, but neither of them was wearing pants.

Kate and Paul had both hunched down out of the woman’s sight line.

“Close the curtains,” Paul hissed.

“She’ll know we just closed them because she’s here,” she said.

They were both whispering urgently.

“So?” he said. “She should have warned us she was showing up.”

Kate watched the woman get out of the car, but she didn’t come to the door. She was going to the small outdoor shed. She unlocked the padlock. She didn’t glance up at the house.

“What’s she doing?” Paul said.

“Hold on.”

Before Kate pulled the curtains closed, she looked out again—the doors of the outdoor shed were wide open now, Djuna busy moving boxes out onto the grass. Doing what, exactly? Not their business.

They kept crouching on the carpet.

“How long is she gonna be out there?”

“Not like we were going anywhere,” Kate said. Their dinner reservation was still a half hour away.

The feeling of being trapped settled in. Although it hadn’t occurred to them to, say, sit out on the porch and admire the changing light, now that they couldn’t do such a thing it seemed very unfair, Djuna’s presence. Much better to feel thwarted.

•

It took them longer than it should have to get dressed. They’d be a little late for their reservation. The restaurant was only a ten-minute walk away—no shoulder on the road, most of the way there, but there wasn’t that much traffic.

Kate put on her jacket. She ran her fingers through her damp hair.

Paul was lagging, as usual. Kate waited for him on the porch.

It was lavender outside, the nice evening light. The insects hazing in the grass and brambles. Kate bent to put on her shoes, and had nearly straightened up before she realized that Djuna was standing at the base of the porch steps.

“Oh.”

Kate had forgotten about Djuna. She smiled to cover how startled she was. “I didn’t see you, sorry.”

No response.

Kate waited for the woman to introduce herself. The woman didn’t. Paul would be out any moment, and that would be good, Kate thought, he’d break this strange tension.

“Sorry,” the woman said, finally. “That’s mine? Is that my coat?”

Kate looked down at herself. “My coat?”

“Is that mine?”

Kate smiled at her, dumbly. “Um, no, it’s my coat.”

“Did you go in the downstairs closet?”

Were there cameras or something? Her face got hot. “No.”

“ ’Cause I have that coat in the closet. That exact coat.”

Kate looked down at herself again. “Yeah, sorry. This is my coat. It’s, like, a pretty popular style of coat,” she added, in what sounded like a desperate, fake voice.

It was Kate’s coat, she’d had it since college, so why did she suddenly have the fear that she had stolen it from this woman?

“Do you want to go, like, check that your coat is still in the closet?”

“Sorry,” Djuna said. “Sorry.”

Her eyes were squinted still, unpleasantly, such a pretty woman looking very unpretty.

Paul finally emerged onto the porch.

“Oh, hi,” he said, smiling at Djuna. “It’s such a great house. Thanks again.”

“Mm.”

Djuna made a face that Kate was familiar with, downloading the information of Kate and Paul’s age difference. Though the disapproval usually wasn’t this visible, this obvious.

Paul darted a glance at Kate.

“Well, we’re heading to dinner. Have a good night,” Paul said.

•

“What was that,” he murmured to Kate as they walked past Djuna’s car.

“Wait a sec.”

Kate didn’t want to say anything until they were entirely out of Djuna’s sight line. They turned right out of the driveway and headed toward town.

Kate looked back: Djuna was hidden behind the trees. She waited an extra beat anyway before she said anything.

•

The restaurant was staffed by good-looking students from the nearby college, their skin ruddy with the health they were intent on destroying, cigarette packs sticking out of their back pockets. Their waiter recited the specials off his notepad.

They both got cocktails—Kate pointed at the menu, rather than say the humiliating name of the cocktail out loud.

As she drank, she watched the people walking past the tall windows. Expecting that Djuna would be among them. She wasn’t.

At the bar was a young guy, maybe a few years younger than Kate. He was some kind of volunteer paramedic, sitting, in his uniform, on the very edge of his stool, visibly pleased with himself. He was loud, addressing the bartender and the whole room at the same time.

“This car just flipped,” the guy said, “totally on its roof. Like, full on.”

The bartender watched him talk with a perfunctory expression of interest, all her actual energy expended in the busy motions of her hands.

“Could have been a lot worse,” the guy said.

He had an expectant shine on his cheeks, anticipating some kind of response—admiration, Kate guessed. She accidentally caught his eye and looked away quickly.

“Young men are horrible,” she said.

•

She was drunk after a bottle of wine at dinner, plus the embarrassing cocktails. Maybe this was actually a fun trip.

They were going to put a movie on back at the house.

“Who’s watching this crap,” Paul said, reclining on the bed, scrolling through the Recently Watched on his laptop.

Kate said it was just his son, probably.

She did not mention that she’d given Paul’s Netflix password to her ex—Paul’s algorithm now thoroughly torqued.

They couldn’t agree on a movie. And it was still so early—they could walk to the pub. Sunday was open-mike night, they’d learned from a lively bulletin board in town. And they had to go to the bakery for breakfast tomorrow—their friend had insisted. Blue-corn pancakes. These sounded foul, but everyone, they had been assured, loved them.

Sure, they would do all these things. All these activities. Kate just wanted to close her eyes for a second. A quick nap before they went out again—twenty minutes, that was all she needed, a brief time-out to metabolize some of this alcohol.

•

When she opened her eyes, it was one in the morning.

Paul was awake, still fully dressed, reading in bed beside her. The lamp was on.

“Fuck,” Kate said.

“I know,” Paul said. “I just woke up, too. I was trying to let you sleep.”

“I’m starving,” she said. “Do you think anything is still open?”

“Definitely not.”

Kate groaned. “Now I’m too hungry to fall asleep.”

“Let’s just try, O.K.?” Paul put away his book.

Kate unbuttoned her jeans and kicked them down her legs.

They stared up at the ceiling. After a while, Paul turned out the light.

“Let’s just wake up really early tomorrow,” Paul said in the darkness. His voice sounded strained. “O.K.? Then we can nap in the afternoon but we’ll still be on schedule.”

Try to sleep. Kate thought this over and over. Just close your eyes. Just fall asleep.

•

Already past eleven by the time they woke up. There would be no blue-corn pancakes, no sourdough toast or cardamom buns or cappuccinos. There would be no food at all—everything was closed on Mondays, it turned out.

They had watery coffee from the rental’s blighted Moka pot. Kate had some of Paul’s chocolate. It left a strange film on her tongue. Maybe cigarettes weren’t even that bad, Kate thought, forcing herself to swallow the tasteless chocolate. They’d recently watched a documentary about a singer who’d smoked his whole life and died at eighty. Didn’t seem terrible. Unless you were eighty, probably, and then it would seem terrible.

•

They drove around looking for something that was open. There was a farm stand in a low, new-looking building, with a burgundy corrugated-metal roof. So much of the new construction around here seemed to be painted that same burgundy or forest green.

Some of the fruit had stickers on it. It looked pallid. Kate suspected but did not say that none of it was grown there.

There were baked goods wrapped tightly in Saran Wrap and jars of honey with the farm logo and bags of multicolored dried pasta, also stickered with the farm logo.

They got a slab of brownie and an oatmeal cookie.

Paul insisted on buying a bag of apples.

“It’s not even the season,” Kate said, peevishly.

Paul took a few bites of an apple in the car.

There was no crunch.

“It’s good,” he said, brightly.

•

They decided to go to the wilderness preserve. Another recommendation from their friend. They drove for a long time, looking for the preserve. Kate worried, privately, that Paul was lost. She had started to worry more about this lately: that Paul was lost, that he was, in some fundamental way, disoriented.

The wilderness preserve, they discovered, was also closed on Mondays.

•

They had a just O.K. dinner at the Mexican restaurant the next town over. The chips were warm and bad, their warmth basically cancelling out their badness. And it was fun whenever they made the wordless agreement, as a couple, that they would drink. Really drink. The mutual suspension of judgment was heady, like a jaunt through international waters, some temporarily ungovernable zone. If they’d had cigarettes, Kate was sure, Paul would have smoked them.

On the way out, Kate took a pocketful of cheap peppermint candies from the bowl by the register and crunched through them on the drive home, the windows open to the swimmy dark.

•

Had Djuna been here? While they were out?

No, that was crazy. But something seemed different in the house, shifted around.

“Like, wasn’t your book on the couch?” Kate said.

“You’re just being drunk,” Paul said. With fondness.

Kate was drunk, it was true, and, because she was drunk, it didn’t seem so bad. That Djuna had been in the house. Because she definitely had been.

They split another Norco.

“We have to leave by 10 a.m., O.K.?”

Djuna had been very clear: if you stayed past ten in the morning, she charged you for another night.

“10:01? 10:02? You think she’s just lying in wait to catch you?” Kate said. “Or it’s like those minibars in hotels that have sensors, so if you even lift up a Coke they bill you.”

The windows were dark, reflecting the lights of the living room.

Djuna wasn’t out there. Obviously. Still, Kate got up to close the curtains. She sat in the hammock and let herself dangle for a while.

It smelled like other people’s bodies.

“Does anyone ever wash this,” she said, tonelessly.

“Probably not.”

Kate heaved herself out. They still had a few beers left in the fridge.

“Want one?”

Paul did. While Kate opened the beers, Paul got himself into the hammock, ass first. One foot still touched the ground.

He kicked to rock the hammock back and forth.

“Nice,” he said.

Paul looked at the ceiling as the hammock rocked.

Was he having a good time, Kate wondered.

When they were in the car, Paul’s son had FaceTimed to ask for the frickin’ Wi-Fi password ’cause the frickin’ Internet wasn’t working again, and it was so frickin’ annoying. Paul had soothed his son with shocking patience. “It’s a zero, not an ‘O.’ And uppercase ‘P,’ ” he’d said into the phone. “Uppercase.”

Back in the city, the ex-wife would be moistening the dog’s food with a little goat’s milk. Readying the steroid shot. It hadn’t even been a question, whether Paul would help take care of the dog. Despite the monkish haircut.

The hammock was rocking faster now. Paul peeping out as he swung.

“Are you ever, like, What happened to me?” Kate said. “Why am I in this stupid upstate house with a stupid Tulum hammock?”

“No.”

Maybe Paul really didn’t regret any of it.

He kept rocking. He stretched back, surrendering himself fully to the fabric.

It’s not even that nice, Kate was about to say, of lying in a hammock. Before she could say it, one end of the hammock snapped.

Paul fell to the ground.

•

Oh, God.

The first instinct was to laugh. But it wasn’t funny.

Paul groaned.

His eyes closed, then sputtered back open. Kate was kneeling beside him. “Shit,” she said. “Shit. Baby?”

He looked drained of life.

Oh, fuck. Oh, fuck.

The impulse to touch him, her hands hovering.

She needed to call someone—she understood that.

She had to find the address of the house in the e-mail from Djuna. To say where they were.

•

Kate had no memory of letting them into the house, the paramedics, but now they were here, efficient and relentless and managing the situation. They’d suggested that she give them some space. Maybe the suggestion had been more of a demand. She stood dumbly by the fireplace.

She didn’t want to ask yet. If Paul was O.K. And they would have said something, wouldn’t they? If he really wasn’t?

They were moving him carefully onto a hard plastic stretcher. Like in that sleepover game, Light as a Feather, Stiff as a Board, multiple paramedics crowded around to lift Paul’s prone body. It took an excruciatingly long time. He was blinking. He said something quietly.

A good sign, surely.

Kate should find Paul’s phone. She didn’t have his kids’ phone numbers.

It was only in that lull, reminding herself to look around for Paul’s phone, that she saw a young man hanging back, crouched by the fireplace. His outfit was a little different from the others’. And it took a second before she placed him—the young man from the restaurant bar. In his volunteer-paramedic uniform. A walkie-talkie was squalling on his belt holster.

He watched the proceedings intently. Ready to leap into action.

“Easy does it,” the young man said, as the others strapped Paul to the board. None of them responded, or even acknowledged him.

Why was he here, the young man? Lurking, useless?

Kate tried to ignore him, tried to concentrate whatever scant faculties she currently possessed on the unfolding situation.

Her eye was drawn to the carpet. She stared at it.

The stain, she realized, was still there. Faint. But still visible.

•

The young man drove the car along the highway, Kate in the passenger seat. The car was just the man’s hatchback, nothing special, following behind the ambulance that carried Paul; for some reason, they had not allowed her to ride in the ambulance with Paul.

But the movies, Kate had wanted to say. They let everyone do it in the movies.

Maybe she hadn’t insisted with enough vigor. Maybe there was a correct way to act in these situations and she was already performing her role in this crisis badly.

The ambulance had its lights going, up ahead, but not the siren. Because there weren’t any other cars on the road, probably. But it did make her anxious, this lack of urgency.

At what point did she need to let Paul’s kids know? God—or the ex-wife.

Kate checked her pocket again to make sure she had Paul’s phone.

“He’ll be fine,” the young man said in a chatty tone. “I’ve seen people walk away from, like, really worse stuff. Like car crashes. Full-on rollovers.”

“Mm.”

They shouldn’t have opened the closet door, Kate thought. As if that had caused everything. A dumb thought. But maybe this was how it felt, when life cleaved into the before and after—it was this dumb.

The young man kept talking. Something about the car accidents they had up here, a new measure from the county to put in a roundabout. She wasn’t listening. The ambulance was no longer in front of them. How had he managed to lose it on this empty road? Drive, she wanted to mutter at him, like in the movies, but she stayed quiet.

Paul would be fine. They’d be together soon.

She tried to seem occupied with staring out the passenger-side window.

“You’re looking out like there’s something to see,” the young man said, cheerily.

It was black out there, it was true. Nothing to see but varying shades of darkness. Maybe he’d meant it as a joke, and probably he’d be smiling, if she glanced over to check.

But something stopped her. She didn’t want to look over at the young man. It seemed important that she not look at him. Why had she just got in the car with this stranger? Had the paramedics even told her to do it? She couldn’t remember. Maybe he wasn’t taking her to the hospital at all.

Her own phone rang in her lap, cutting through the quiet.

The screen showed an unfamiliar number.

She answered the call.

“Hello?” Kate said into the silence.

She should have insisted on staying with Paul, she realized. That had been another mistake.

“Hello?” Kate said again.

“Excuse me,” the voice said. “Excuse me,” the voice repeated. “Is this Kate?”

It was Djuna, and she had stopped by the house (why had she stopped by the house?) and found all the doors open and the lights on and she was mad, was the gist, and Djuna would be contacting the Web site in the morning, if not the police. She sounded nearly hysterical. It’s about respect, Djuna was saying. You people, she said.

“Everything O.K.?” the young man asked Kate in a stage whisper, his face ghoulish in the wan light. Kate saw, then, that they were parked in front of a hospital, under the concrete arch of the Emergency entrance.

Kate put her hand on the car door. She nodded at the man, the phone still pressed to her ear, Djuna’s unending stream of invectives slithering into her brain. She’d explain the situation to Djuna, was about to explain, but, when she did, it would already be too late: Kate had taken receipt of the message, understood the call for the curse it was.

•

Almost a month later, Paul was installed back in their apartment, subject to the daily ministrations of a therapy team, who moved each of his limbs in steady, maddeningly slow arcs.

There had been so many loads of laundry those first days they were back. Endless legal pads that Kate had filled with notes and names and instructions and underlined dosage reminders and the anxious, pointless rows of checkered boxes that she had doodled in moments of stress since she was a child.

She kept her phone on her at all times: there were innumerable calls, crucial points to follow up on, each thread equally important. Her phone had never seen so much use. The constant notifications, that buoyant little ping that signalled a new e-mail, a resonant chime like optimism itself, and it was a time when the situation was still fluid, subject to change, and so Kate should have jumped at the sound: someone might still deliver good news.

It could be the second-opinion doctor; it could be the out-of-network neurosurgeon. It could be a friend of a friend sending along details of some experimental intervention that would tilt them toward a happier ending.

Yet she had noticed a slight hesitance to check her phone, to face what might have arrived: Kate was afraid. It was illogical, a stupid fear circling mutely below the relentless din of the ongoing crisis—but it was there. She was afraid of Djuna.

Kate knew she was being crazy. Knowing this didn’t help.

Kate had explained everything to Djuna, on that phone call. Or everything she knew at that time, the night at the hospital that already seemed many aeons ago. There was no world in which Djuna would pose any kind of problem.

If anything, Djuna was the one who should be afraid, the one losing sleep, just waiting for some lawyer’s missive. Djuna should be terrified.

Maybe she had stolen Djuna’s jacket, Kate thought, idly, dumping the dregs of Paul’s meal-replacement shake down the drain. She caught herself. She hadn’t. She told herself again more firmly: she definitely hadn’t.

She would never admit it to anyone, this embarrassing Djuna fixation—there was no real way to say it.

What was she afraid of, exactly? What could Djuna even do? Leave them a bad review?

Yes. Maybe. And maybe it would say everything—that was the part that Kate couldn’t really explain. Somehow Djuna would know the things they had done wrong, all the mistakes, recent and ancient, they had ever made. She would know the ugly little ways they’d used each other, the petty, private cudgels they’d made of their own emotions. Had they ever loved each other, she and Paul? Yes, Kate thought, dully. Once, Paul had said, as a joke, “I love you as much as I’m capable of loving anyone.” And Kate had laughed and said something like “Me, too.” But there was some part of her that knew it was true. Djuna would know it, too. Djuna would see right to their core, inventory their paltry souls, and make these findings known. They weren’t good people. And Djuna knew it. They’d got what they deserved.

•

Kate kept the windows shut in the apartment and the air-conditioning on. The air was stale. Paul’s eyes roved around the room, then landed on Kate’s. His pupils dilated, his eyes wettened. Kate squeezed his hand.

“There, there,” she said, or thought she said. ♦