Title: Woman, Frog, and Devil
Author: Olga Tokarczuk

January could easily have made a good second marriage, but he had lost all interest in women, as though his wife, who had died several months after giving birth, enfeebled by the effort of producing a child and by some sort of inexplicable depression, had permanently destroyed his trust in the fairer sex—as if he felt cheated by this, or even disgraced. She had given birth and promptly died! What nerve! His mother had passed away prematurely, too. There was something wrong with these mothers; they seemed to do a terribly dangerous job, risking their lives tangled in lace in their boudoirs and bedrooms, leading a lethal existence among the bedclothes and the copper pans, among the towels, powders, and stacks of menus for every day of the year. In Mieczysław Wojnicz’s family world, the women had vague, short, perilous lives, and then they died, remaining in people’s memories as fleeting shapes without contours. They were reduced to a remote, unclear impulse placed in the universe temporarily, for the sole purpose of its biological consequences.

Later, Mieczysław’s nanny would exist in his memory as a blurred figure, always veiled by something, out of focus, on the run, a long, thin streak. But as a child he played with her, with her hands and the wrinkled skin on them. He would grip that skin between his thumb and forefinger, pretending to be a gander (they called it “tweaking”), and in doing so he would smooth out her hands until they became almost young. He used to fantasize that if he could figure out how to smooth out all of Gliceria (this bizarre name was very popular in those days among the peasants in the Lwów region), to tighten up her outer form, maybe he would succeed in saving his nanny from old age. But he couldn’t.

His father believed that the blame for both national disasters and educational failures lay with a soft upbringing that encouraged girlishness, mawkishness, and passivity, nowadays fashionably termed “individualism.” He did not approve. What counted were manliness, energy, social work for the public good, rationalism, pragmatism. He was especially fond of the word “pragmatism.”

In the name of Mieczysław’s education and appropriately masculine upbringing, January decided to sell some of the land and property that his wife had left him and to buy a bright, comfortable apartment in Lwów. He took Gliceria with them, to serve as cook, maid, and nanny. From then on, as befitted a respectable, if incomplete, family, they became citizens of Lwów.

It was a good decision. By investing his money in modernity, January had behaved very pragmatically, and in fact he gained many advantages from living in the city. His new business interests picked up; it was easier to take care of them on the spot than it had been from sluggish, provincial Galicia, from which every trip to the city was like a voyage across the ocean.

January Wojnicz was an enterprising, courageous man. He put some of the money from the property he had sold into a small apartment house and a brickyard in a village near Brzeżany, and he placed the rest in shares in the Galician railway; all together this provided him with a tidy income, easily enough to support himself and his son in perfectly decent style. He was sensible and cautious, bordering on stingy. On the rare occasions when he bought an object, it was always of the best quality.

Naturally, attempts were made to marry him off for a second time, but in January Wojnicz’s mind his late wife had become such a unique, perfect creature that no woman on earth could be more than a poor shadow of her, a figure unworthy of attention, or even annoying, as if she were clumsily trying to imitate that wondrous being.

As a result, the only woman Mieczysław Wojnicz remembered having seen up close and in detail was Gliceria. She mothered him a bit in the kitchen, supplying him with tasty morsels, but, as her authority did not extend beyond the thresholds of the other rooms, it was only there that little Mieczyś (as he was known to his father and his uncle in those days) was pampered. She tried to compensate him for the loss of his mother by pouring a little buckwheat honey onto his plate, or by cutting the crunchy heel off a loaf of bread and thickly spreading it with fresh butter. Food always had good associations for him.

He received these manifestations of warm feeling with a gratitude that might have had a chance of developing into affection and love, but his father would not allow that. January treated Gliceria as nothing more than a servant, never with familiarity, and was full of mistrust toward this plump, elderly woman, hidden among skirts, flounces, and bonnets. He despised her corpulence and, suspecting her of stealing food, paid her less than he should have.

There was always something uneasy about Mieczyś’s childhood baths. His father would take a long time to test him on his prayers before reluctantly handing him over to Gliceria. He would lead the child to her kingdom, the kitchen, where a tin tub full of steaming hot water would already be waiting on the floor. Mieczyś could not remember his father ever being present for bath time. The scent of soap and clean towels was a festive smell, the fragrance of Saturdays. Gliceria would receive him in her plump hands, with her sleeves rolled up to the elbows, ruddy from the heat and smiling, and from that point on little Mieczyś became a participant in the ritual of undressing, being immersed in the water, and being scrubbed with a washcloth moistened with the scented soap that Gliceria kept specially for his delicate skin, for his use only.

Throughout the bath, she twittered away to him in Polish and Ukrainian as nobody else ever did. He was her “little pearl,” her “baby soap bubble,” her “buttercup,” her “little gem,” and her “wee angel.” The profusion of names intoxicated the young Mieczyś, who could not absorb all the images magically revealed by these words: jewels, churches, forests, gardens—an entire world was contained in them, and other worlds, too, that he did not know from his own experience but the shape of which he could imagine. The parts of his body were his “handies,” his “tootsies,” his “leglets,” his “wee chest”; addressed this way, he felt pleased with himself and somehow even proud of his existence, a feeling he never had when communing with his father. As he gazed at his protruding stomach, it was a “tummy,” and the hole in it was his “belly button.” Gliceria would coo over him with sweat pouring from her brow, the entire kitchen now a steam bath.

Then she would pull Mieczyś out and onto the table, where a towel was spread, and rub the boy dry, tickling him under the arms or pretending she wanted to bite off his “wee toes.” Mieczyś remembered not to laugh too loudly, for fear of alarming his father, who would probably race in, trailing the cold from the corridor and halting this delicious game, so he just giggled quietly.

His freshly laundered flannel pajamas were stiff and unpleasant, but Mieczyś knew that the next morning, after the first night, they would be the same as ever—nice and soft. The passage of time smoothed out the creases and roughness, making the world a friendlier place. Once he was sitting in his pajamas, Gliceria would fetch a comb and run it through his fair hair, cut in a pageboy, and could never resist trying to braid it into little plaits.

“It’s so strong, so thick,” she would say.

It was wonderful to find that the repertoire of valuable things he had at his disposal included his hair. Of course, she quickly unplaited it, but she would comb it in curls on his brow, which his father instantly ruffled when he came to say good night, as Mieczyś lay in his cold room in newly starched sheets, with a bed warmer at his feet, reflecting on those weekly bath-time endearments.

His father had often repeated to him, though Mieczysław did not actually remember when and in what situations he had heard him say it—“repeated” meant that he expressed it somehow, sometimes without even opening his mouth—that women were, by nature, treacherous and fickle. Weepy. It was impossible to know what to grab on to, what to trust in them. They were elusive, as slippery as snakes or silk (a peculiar juxtaposition, indeed). It was hard to catch hold of them; they slithered out of your hand and then laughed at your ineptitude. There was an old saying that Uncle Emil, January’s younger brother and a cavalry officer in the Austrian Army, frequently quoted, and this Mieczysław remembered well. It had to do with Gliceria, or maybe with a fiancée of his uncle’s, the only one, who had walked out on him and married someone else. On these occasions, his uncle—who normally had such impeccable manners—would remove the spoon from his soup and brandish it above his plate.

“Woman, frog, and devil, these are siblings treble.”

The little Wojnicz did his best to fathom the meaning of this adage, but he had no idea what exactly his uniformed uncle, who usually expressed himself precisely, was trying to say. Was there really a connection between a woman, a frog, and a devil? This damp, murky threesome removed the woman from wallpapered, tidy bourgeois bedrooms and dragged her into the woods and the marshy zones of peat bogs; apparently the trio were relatives from the same abyss in the depths of the forest, where no human voice or eye could reach, and where every traveller lost his way. Oh, well, there were no such forests in the vicinity of Lwów, maybe only somewhere in Volhynia, or on the slopes of the Carpathian Mountains. He found it easier to imagine what Gliceria might have in common with a frog than with a devil, though he had never seen a devil, and to tell the truth he did not believe in them. “Folktales,” his father would say. As for the frog, then yes, indeed: she was fat and shapeless, and her apron-topped skirts deformed her figure even more. If she were to squat down on the kitchen floor and raise her head the right way—yes, she would look like a frog.

Gliceria grew older. It became harder and harder for her to carry out her duties—to launder, cook, iron, and clean—and she left when Mieczyś was seven years old, having seen him through to school age. By then, his father had decided that she was no longer needed in any case; a boarding school would replace her. Once he had established all the terms with the headmaster, Mr. Szuman, he handed the boy over to him. Unfortunately, Mieczyś did not stay at this institution for long, for reasons that with friends his father referred to as “sensitivity” and “an inability to conform,” which for the boy meant total humiliation and for the father a desperate attempt to make sense of the whole disappointing situation.

Proving the old saying “There is no evil that does not bring good,” Mieczyś was, from then on, taught at home by a full-time tutor, first one, then a second, and a third, which cost his father a lot of money and anxiety, because teachers were the most chimeric species in existence—nothing pleased them, and they were always finding something to complain about.

Gliceria was succeeded by Józef. He usually made pierogi, and fried fish bought at the market. Sometimes he sent Mieczyś to the cellar for potatoes and sauerkraut. This was one of the “Indian brave” tasks his father had devised, for which the little Wojnicz received badges. Going down into the cellar meant having to conquer a sudden attack of fear and disgust that made his fingers tremble as they lit the candles. The cellar was L-shaped, leading first to the left, then to the right. The potatoes lay in the darkest, dampest corner, fenced off behind some boards, in a heap that dwindled by the day and in spring sprouted white shoots, desperately seeking the light. Beside them stood barrels full of cabbage and gherkins.

Once, he saw a large toad in there, sitting motionless on top of the potatoes, staring at him with its bulging yellow eyes. He screamed and raced upstairs, but, despite his pleading and tears, his father told him to go back down. Luckily the toad was not there anymore. Afterward, every time he went into the cellar, he inevitably had it in mind; whenever he thought about it, it was there, and would remain there forever. The idea of killing it, as he at first imagined, by taking a large stone down with him from the sunlit world and throwing it at the soft, warty body, gave him a strange thrill that made his pulse run faster. But he was afraid that the consequences of this murder would be even more terrible. Crushed by a stone, the toad would contaminate the potatoes, and he would never be able to forget about it. From then on, whenever he put his hands into the barrel of gherkins, he was afraid that by some miracle it had got in there, and that he would accidentally take hold of it as it lurked among the pickles, as if it had the power to change into anything damp and slimy. Yes, it was a great school of courage—he earned those badges the hard way.

On Sundays, father and son went out to a restaurant on Trybunalska Street, where they had a ritual lunch consisting of soup, a main course, and dessert—and, for the father, an alcoholic drink and coffee—to convince themselves that one could get by without women and incompetent cooks.

Their apartment on Pańska Street in Lwów was cozy and sunny. The drawing-room and dining-room windows overlooked the street, quite a noisy one, because the cobblestones paving it changed every movement into a rumble, a drumroll. But, after a few years, their brains grew so accustomed to the noise that January thought of their abode as quiet.

When Mieczyś reached the age of thirteen, he was enrolled at a German-language gymnasium on Governor’s Ramparts. Twice a day, he walked the route from home to school and back, passing the Bernardine monastery and then looking at the shop displays on Cłowa Street and Czarnecki Street. Then he went past the fire station, feeling decidedly greater respect for this institution than for the monastery. Several times he was witness to the firemen mustering to sally forth, whether as an exercise or to attend to a real fire, and the coördination of these agile men in uniform always delighted him. The terse commands, shouts, and gestures reminded him of dances he had seen in the countryside, with foot stamping and bizarre figures performed by human bodies. The firemen danced for a purpose—to respond to a blaze, to prevent destruction or even death. Their well-practiced movements were measured to perfection, faultlessly effective. Whatever move one of them started, others finished. They passed one another hoses and buckets, they reported, leaped up and down, one-two-three, and the fire engine was ready for the road, ready to fight the element, and they sat motionless on their seats like lead soldiers. Then one of them started the siren, which drew the whole world into the orbit of their service. Little Mieczyś was so awed that goosebumps appeared on his skin. In just two minutes, the fire engine was prepared for battle—wrapped in hoses, equipped with pickaxes, crowbars, and hatchets, and encrusted with shining brass helmets—and it moved through the open gate into the city.

He walked on through the shady old trees in the park on the Ramparts and reached the school, which towered over the city, elevated, like the Dormition Church with its three cupolas standing opposite. In this church—he sometimes looked in there—was a painted angel that made him especially joyful. He called it the Four-Fingered Angel, ignoring the name Gabriel, which was written next to it, because the way the artist had depicted its hand, extended in a gesture of blessing, made it look as if it were missing a thumb, and the ring finger was slightly too short as well. Little Mieczyś felt a sort of strange relief as he gazed at this imperfection in perfection. Thanks to this minor flaw, the angel seemed closer to him, not to say human. Captured in motion, standing firmly on the ground in a green, shimmering robe (yes, there were spots of light on it), with one wing visible—not made of feathers, like a goose’s wing, but as if woven from hundreds of tiny beads, and lined in red—it held a reed and looked busy, somehow preoccupied. Angels were described as “he,” but it seemed obvious that the Four-Fingered Angel was exempt from these brutal divisions and had its own separate place, its own angel’s sex, its own divine gender.

At the gymnasium, Mieczyś was taught German by Mścisław Baum, a large, good-looking Jew with the physique of a Viking, and although in the lessons the students constantly did their best to pronounce the words carefully, to speak the German of Goethe, something always pulled them toward Galicia and its singsong, slanting, Polonized and Yiddisher version of the language, in which the words seemed slightly flattened, like old slippers—one could feel safe and at home in it.

Mieczyś’s class could be divided into four groups: Poles, Jews, Ukrainians, and a mixed crowd including several Austrians, one Romanian, two Hungarians, and three Transylvanian Germans. Mieczyś instinctively kept to the sidelines, as if he did not belong to any of these groups, and ethnicity was not enough for him to define his place in the jigsaw puzzles they were always making, changing the vectors of strength, dependence, and advantage. The other children seemed to him too noisy, and he was afraid he might get into conflicts. He could not bear violence, all that rivalry, all the scrimmages and punches. He was friendly—perhaps that was too big a word—with a boy named Anatol, or Tolek for short, whose father, an assimilated Jew, was a well-known dentist. The boy clearly had artistic talents and a certain delicacy of manner that appealed to Mieczysław. Sometimes he let Tolek rummage in his wooden pencil case. Tolek would carefully arrange the pencils with his long fingers, touching the graphite points with a fingertip, and Mieczyś would feel a shiver of pleasure, from the skin on his head down to his shoulders and back. Together they were a couple of outsiders.

His father hoped that learning to play chess would organize Mieczyś’s foggy, unruly mind. After all, chess was played at court, and the emperor himself had shown great fondness for it. This was the entertainment of wellborn men, requiring both intelligence and an ability to see ahead. The elder Wojnicz believed that moving around the chessboard in keeping with the rules would introduce an element of automatism into his son’s life that would make the world safe for him, if not welcoming. So every day after lunch, just as their bodies were digesting and a gentle afternoon somnolence was suffusing them, they sat down at the table and set out the chessboard, and his father would let Mieczysław make the first move. Whenever the boy made a mistake, his father came over to his side, stood behind him, and tried to steer the child’s attention through a cause-and-effect chain of potential next moves. Whenever Mieczyś was resistant, or “dull,” his father let himself be carried away by anger and left the room to smoke a cigar, while his son had to sit over the chessboard until he had thought up a sensible defense or attack.

Little Mieczysław Wojnicz understood the rules and could foresee a lot, but, to tell the truth, the game did not interest him. Making moves according to the rules and aiming to defeat your opponent seemed to him just one of the possible ways to use the pawns. He preferred to daydream, and to see the chessboard as a space where the fates of the unfortunate pawns and other pieces were played out; he cast them as characters, linked by all sorts of relationships, weaving complex webs of intrigue, either with or against one another. He thought it a waste to limit their activity to the checkered board, to leave them at the mercy of a formal game played according to strict rules. So, as soon as his father lost interest and went off to see to more important matters, Mieczyś would move the chess pieces onto the steppes of the rug and the mountains of the armchair, where they saw to their own business, set off on journeys, and furnished their kitchens, houses, and palaces. His father’s ashtray became a boat, and the pen holders were oars, while the space underneath a chair turned into a cathedral where the wedding of the two queens, black and white, was taking place.

Among this race of chess people, he always identified with the knight, who delivered news, made peace between those who were at odds, organized the provisions for expeditions, or warned of dangers (such as Józef’s entrance, carpet cleaning, or being summoned for lunch). Then, when chided by his father, or sent to his room without supper as a punishment, he would head off with the dignity of a knight—two steps forward and one to the side.

Mieczyś applied himself most to mathematics and chemistry, as his father wanted him to, and in the belief that his father knew better than he did. But he was fascinated by Latin, and if he could have he would have devoted most of his time to it. The Latin master, the tiny, rather comical Mr. Amborski, lent him books, of which Mieczyś’s favorite was “The Golden Ass,” by Apuleius. It was an old edition, in the Bibliotheca Scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum Teubneriana series, but it proved too difficult for a beginner to read. So the kind Mr. Amborski found and gifted him a German translation by August Rode, and Mieczyś came to know this version almost by heart, enjoying the text wherever he opened it. It was the only book he loved, and nothing else had ever made such a great impression on him. Somehow the picaresque tale of an unlucky man transformed into a donkey suited him personally. He felt a kinship with Lucius, though of course they differed in terms of courage, sense of humor, and curiosity about the world. Lucius was the hero, but he smiled wryly from the pages of the book, ironically, contesting his own hero status, conscious of his own absurdity.

Mieczyś wanted to be just like Lucius: cunning, cheeky, and self-confident. He could even have accepted Lucius’ naïveté, which proved to be a good quality that always led to unexpected places, down the alleyways of life, where one might experience a sudden or even a violent transformation. Where one might change and become unrecognizable, and yet still remain one’s real self inside. Clearly there was both an outer and an inner existence. The “internal” one was dressed in the “external” one, and from then on was perceived by the world in that form. But, Mieczyś wondered, why might the “internal” feel so uncomfortable inside the “external”? Lucius’ adventures were like dreadful torments, because the danger of never managing to return to his own shape was always hanging over him, the threat that he would die as a donkey, and that his real nature, his internal existence, would never be recognized! Mieczyś was deeply affected by this drama, though of course he did not confide in anyone about it. Lucius seemed less upset by his situation than the boy reader was; with his roguish, ironical smirk, Lucius stuck fast to the horizon of Mieczyś’s world, as a donkey and as a person all at once, believing that one day he would find his rosebush, and that his metamorphosis would occur by command of the mightiest goddess.

Whenever Uncle Emil was due to arrive in Lwów, special preparations were made. Józef would run to the shops and always return with a duck in a basket, while a boy from the market helped to bring in the vegetables and apples—apples were a must.

Emil was a tall, handsome, fair-haired young man with a flaxen mustache that gave his youthful, delicate features gravity and manliness. His blue-gray jacket beautifully hugged his slender torso and lent his skin a refined pallor. But finest of all—as Mieczyś saw it—were the red breeches tucked into knee-high, wonderfully polished boots. Emil would arrive, click his heels, and immediately light a cigar, in which the boy’s father kept him company. Mieczyś would receive from his uncle a box of cakes from the pâtisserie and some military trinket or other: cartridge cases, a penknife or a mess tin. Then he would have to answer his uncle’s questions, which, as he had learned everything inside out, he did convincingly and with great confidence: “A cavalry division consists of two brigades with two regiments each.” Or “A cavalry regiment includes six troops.” He also had to add that each division had under it a special horse-artillery division and four machine-gun subunits. It was from these guns that the cartridge cases came, though Mieczyś was not quite sure what to do with them. He simply carried them in his pocket and felt their pleasant weight.

Once, in the night, Mieczyś got up to pee and, still half asleep, came upon his uncle in the bathroom. Emil had a band stretched over his mustache which bisected his face, flattening his features and making his handsome countenance look grotesque and funny, like the face of a puppet. His trousers were down around his ankles, exposing his hairy legs and the brownish gherkin hanging between them. Somehow it seemed to Mieczyś unfitting for a military man to be carrying such a wilted fruit in his trousers.

The day before Uncle Emil’s arrival, as soon as he had done the shopping, Józef would go down to the cellar to cut off the duck’s head, and then all afternoon the bird would hang tied to the metal trim above the tile stove, with the stump of its neck downward over a bowl, into which the blood dripped slowly, drop by drop.

Mieczyś had already learned from earlier pain and regret that on no account should he befriend the duck brought home from the market; he must not feel sorry for it, so he ignored the pitiful, sometimes indignant quacking before it went to the slaughter and blocked his ears to avoid witnessing its brief presence in the house.

But the bleeding, feathery shred tied above the stove filled him with despair and induced doleful, helpless weeping, which he was obliged to hide from his father, his uncle, and even Józef. They would have said that he was whining like a woman. The horrible sight of the dark-red, almost brown blood congealing on the stump forced him into a painful ambivalence, in which he felt afraid, while also feeling a strange, indescribable fascination close to pleasure, far mightier than picking scabs off his knees or teasing an already wobbly milk tooth. His chest was racked by sorrow that could not change into weeping or relief of any kind but just went on pushing from the inside, paralyzing his lungs. For there was a mysterious bond between him and the dead, headless duck as the blood dripped from it, a physical sensation, a feeling of faintness and weakness arising from total defenselessness. The horror was completed by the beauty of the feathers, sticky with blood but shimmering wonderfully in the light of the kitchen, dark blue and golden, inky and greenish, azure, sapphire—there were no names for them, but they unerringly reminded him of the wings of the Four-Fingered Angel. So the duck’s death became blasphemy, an attack on the entire world.

But the worst was yet to come. Whenever, with Józef’s help, the blood, vinegar, prunes, and dried cherries, and seasoning such as allspice, bay leaves, marjoram, and pepper, were used to produce czernina—duck’s-blood soup—Mieczyś knew what torment lay ahead. A plate of this soup would be placed in front of him, as yet another test of maturity to be conducted in the presence of his uncle, the officer. But his father and Emil would not betray any awareness that this was an exceptional, very special situation. They would chat away to each other, usually about business or politics, not yet about whether Emil was planning to marry—this question would arise only over liqueurs. Meanwhile, Mieczyś would be sitting over the plate of chocolate-colored matter full of beads of fat, with his napkin under his chin, feeling tense, helpless against the saliva that was gathering in his mouth and that his constricted throat refused to swallow.

Then his father would cast him a fleeting glance, and, as if sentenced to torture, Mieczyś would pick up his spoon and plunge it into the dark goo. At this point, Emil would be rolling his eyes, saying, with a sigh, that it was the best thing he had eaten in all his life. The satisfaction expressed in these compliments brightened the usually gloomy countenance of Józef, who would not depart for the kitchen, demanding more praise with his presence. Mieczyś knew that the men’s eyes were about to turn to him, so he negotiated with himself internally, explaining to himself that he had to do it, that he could not disappoint his two favorite people, who wanted the best for him, and that to be a real man he needed to master himself, because they were serving him this dish out of love. Then tears would come to his eyes, and the spoon, shaking and spilling drops of soup, would rise to his mouth, which could do nothing but open and receive this offering. He always hoped that his memory of the taste of czernina from the previous occasions was wrong, and that now it would suddenly turn out to be surprisingly good. But once again something uniquely horrible filled his mouth, tinged by the flavors of bay and marjoram and lacquered by a butter brush, but nevertheless disgusting and revolting. It was a taste that screamed, full of violence, steaming, pushing its way between his tongue and cheeks, sweet and sickly. His throat tightened, and he felt the urge to vomit, but was able to control it, to ignore it, so that, after a moment of hesitation, it retreated deep inside his body, disappearing into his intestines, and the helping of boiled animal blood flowed down into his stomach. His father and uncle pretended not to be watching him, but he knew that it was a test and that they were observing him closely and coldly from the corners of their eyes. As he took another spoonful, then another, his father would calm down and start to make jokes. Tears would fill the boy’s eyes, but he ignored them, too, making them vanish somewhere far down in his body.

“This is a traditional Polish soup. Only a simpleton won’t try it. And how much brawn it gives you!” his father said jovially.

Uncle Emil smiled, and the tips of his flaxen mustache took on a dark-red color.

It’s simple, Mieczyś would be thinking as he swallowed his tears, which mingled with animal blood inside his puny child’s body. Being a man means learning to ignore whatever causes trouble. That’s the whole mystery.

He was as he was. He couldn’t help it. He thought of himself as normal. He once tried to explain this to his father, but he could not find the right words. Then he thought about the mysteries of yeast cake rising, or about a pigeon that had laid a sad egg in the recess of a blank window.

A vivid image appeared before his eyes, of the old house in the country, and of underclothes drying in the attic in winter, when it was pouring outside and Gliceria took them up there in pails. He could clearly see the attic, always full of dust, and the view from its small windows, known as bull’s-eyes—fields and a small park, with the acrid smell of rotting tomato stalks, sweet corn, and beans on poles. And by the laws of some inexplicable synesthesia this image changed into a physical sensation: the coarseness of fabric, the stiffness of collars, the angularity of freshly pressed trousers, and the pinch of a hard leather belt. And it was there, in the attic, as soon as he could, whenever he was alone and out of reach of his father’s discipline, that he undressed entirely; he would wrap his naked body in a satin tablecloth edged with soft fringe, and, feeling how blissfully it brushed against his thighs and calves, he would think how wonderful it would be if people could go about in tablecloth tunics, like the ancient Greeks. ♦

(Translated, from the Polish, by Antonia Lloyd-Jones.)